200-RICR-20-20-1

TITLE 200 – BOARD OF EDUCATION
CHAPTER 20 – COUNCIL ON ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY EDUCATION

SUBCHAPTER 20 – EDUCATOR QUALITY AND CERTIFICATION

PART 1 – Regulations Governing the Certification of Educators in Rhode Island

1.1   Purpose, Scope, and Authority
A.    Pursuant to R.I. Gen. Laws § 16-11-1, the educators in Rhode Island Public
      Schools are required to attain certification. Pursuant to R.I. Gen. Laws § 16-60-4,
      the responsibility for setting Regulations for certification rests with the Council on
      Elementary and Secondary Education (Council). The purpose of these
      Regulations is to update the requirements and procedures that govern educator
      certification in Rhode Island. These Regulations detail a comprehensive redesign
      of the certification system that will go into effect as the Rhode Island Department
      of Education (RIDE) creates supports necessary to implement the revisions.

B.    All changes go into effect on June 1, 2025, unless otherwise noted.

1.2   Definitions
A.    As used in this Part the following words and terms have the following meaning.

      1.     “Administrator certificate” means a certification issued to educators whose
             primary duties may include the supervision of programs or curriculum or
             the supervision or management of a local educational agency, a school
             building, a school program, or a school system.

      2.     “Administrative knowledge of field competencies” means the knowledge
             and skills established by the applicable national professional association
             as core competencies for administrators that define the range of
             expectations for the specific certification administrative position(s)
             addressed by the certification area.

      3.     “Administrator knowledge of field testing” means the use of assessments
             to evaluate the knowledge of field and skills of a prospective administrator
             in the specific administrator area.

      4.     “Advanced educator certificate” means the third (3rd) and highest level in
             the three (3) tier system of full certification. This level of certification is held
             by educators who consistently demonstrate accomplished practice.

      5.     “Alternate route Preliminary Certificate” means a Preliminary Certificate
             awarded to prospective educators who are enrolled in a Rhode Island
1
          approved alternate route preparation program and who have been offered
          a position in a district to serve as an educator of record while completing
          certification requirements.

    6.    “Approved program pathway to educator certification” or “Approved
          program” means a post-secondary educator preparation program that
          holds approved status under the program approval standards of the
          Rhode Island Department of Education.

    7.    “Building level administrator” means any individual responsible for the
          administration of a PK-12 school, including principals, assistant principals,
          and charter school chief administrators.

    8.    “Career and technical education Preliminary Certificate” means a
          Preliminary Certificate awarded to prospective educators who have a high
          school diploma and who have demonstrated that they have appropriate
          work experience in their respective career and technical fields. These
          prospective educators can seek employment as teachers of record in
          employing agencies that are willing to employ them while the individuals
          pursue full certification.

    9.    “Certificate” means a document issued by the Rhode Island Department of
          Education that identifies the area(s) of certification held by an educator
          and the date of issuance and date of expiration between which the
          certificate is valid.

    10.   “Certification area” means the specific educational content and grade
          ranges that a teacher is qualified to teach, the specific level of
          administration and grade ranges that an administrator is qualified to lead,
          or the specific role in which a support professional is qualified to serve.

    11.   “Certification route” means a pathway of preparation through which a
          prospective educator attains certification.

    12.   “Certification fees” means fees set by the Council on Elementary and
          Secondary Education to issue certificates.

    13.   “Credential Review Plan” means a plan created by an approved credential
          review consortium institution that will allow an educator to work toward full
          certification. The plan describes how the individual will demonstrate
          evidence of meeting competency, assessment, and field experience
          requirements.

    14.   "Credential Review pathway to certification" means the process of an
          approved credential review institution reviewing an applicant’s preparation
          and experience against a set of standards and criteria to determine gaps
          and create a plan of study identifying coursework, assessments, and field
          experience necessary to be eligible for certification.

2
    15.   “Educator of record” means a certified teacher, administrator, or support
          professional in Rhode Island Public Schools. Teachers of record are
          responsible for providing instruction and determining student grades.
          Administrators of record are responsible for the supervision and
          management of schools, school programs, and school districts. Support
          professionals of record are responsible for instructional leadership or
          serving as a specialist/consultant or a related service provider.

    16.   “Emergency route preliminary certificate” means a Preliminary Certificate
          awarded to prospective educators at the request of an employing agency
          when a fully-certified and qualified educator who meets the criteria for the
          position cannot be secured.

    17.   “Employing agency” means any school committee, school board, charter
          school, educational collaborative, state-approved Special Education
          program and state funded pre-kindergarten program, or other public
          school entity responsible for hiring certified educators.

    18.   "Endorsement" means added to an existing valid teacher, support
          professional or administrator certificate in recognition of specialized or
          advanced expertise in an area. Endorsements are not equivalent to
          teaching certificates and do not qualify an individual for an assignment as
          a teacher-of-record in a public school.

    19.   “English language competency testing” means the assessment of
          competency in English for prospective educators who completed educator
          preparation in a program where the language of instruction was a
          language other than English.

    20.   “Expert residency preliminary certificate” means a Preliminary Certificate
          awarded to prospective educators who demonstrate sufficient preparation
          in content, administrative expertise, or other certificate area specific
          requirements to be considered for positions as educators while pursuing
          certification. These prospective educators can seek employment as
          teachers of record in employing agencies that are willing to employ them
          while the individual pursues full certification. Certified educators seeking to
          add new certification areas may also use the Expert Residency
          Preliminary Certificate as part of a route to certification in that area.

    21.   "Fast-track principal” means a certificate awarded to educators who meet
          the requirements of R.I. Gen. Laws § 16-11-9 and these Regulations. It is
          designed to recognize teaching experience to allow for an expedited
          pathway to principal certification. An educator may also qualify for the Fast
          Track Expert Residency Preliminary Certificate which can be awarded to
          educators with a minimum of ten (10) years of experience who
          demonstrate sufficient leadership qualities. The certificate is requested by
          the employing agency while the individual pursues full certification .


3
    22.   “Full certificate” means a multi-year certificate that demonstrates the
          educator has met all Rhode Island requirements for certification and is
          included in the three (3) tier system of Rhode Island Educator Certificates.

    23.   “Independent certificate area” means an area in which certification can be
          obtained independent of, or not requiring, certification in another area.

    24.   “Initial educator certificate” means the first (1st) level in the three (3) tier
          system of full certification. This level of certification is held by all educators
          when they are certified for the first time in Rhode Island.

    25.   “International teacher certificate” means a certificate issued to out-of-
          country teachers seeking temporary employment as a full-time teacher-of-
          record in a Rhode Island PK-12 public schools.

    26.   “Internship” means an extended field-based experience that provides a
          prospective administrator or support professional the opportunity to
          develop skills in school or school district contexts.

    27.   “Interstate flexibility pathways to educator certification” means the process
          by which Rhode Island issues certification to educators who have
          completed approved educator preparation programs or hold valid full
          certification in one of twenty-four states identified by the Rhode Island
          Department of Education where no testing or experience requirements
          must be met.

    28.   “Local educator evaluation system” means a RIDE-approved educator
          evaluation system that meets Rhode Island Educator Evaluation System
          Standards pursuant to this Part.

    29.   “Major equivalent” means evidence of thirty (30) or more hours of
          coursework in a closely related content area deemed to be acceptable by
          the Rhode Island Department of Education by applicants who did not
          complete a major in the required content area.

    30.   “National Association of State Directors of Teacher Education and
          Certification” or “NASDTEC” means the professional organization that
          represents professional standards boards, commissions and state
          departments of education in all fifty (50) states, the District of Columbia,
          the Department of Defense Educational Activity, and the U.S. Territories
          which are responsible for the preparation, licensure and discipline of
          educational personnel. NASDTEC administers the Interstate Agreement
          for Educator Licensure that supports reciprocity of certification across the
          various state jurisdictions.

    31.   “One-year practical residency” means an approach to the clinical
          preparation of teachers that combines theories of teaching with
          experiential learning. Teacher residencies are designed to approximate
          the breadth and depth of preparing to be the primary certified teacher in a
4
          classroom. The residency may take place over the course of one (1) year
          or may take place over multiple terms, as long as a minimum intensive, full
          teaching load experience is built in. While general field experience is
          designed to expose future teachers to a variety of educational settings and
          children, the one (1) year practical residency is designed to provide deep
          instructional practice.

    32.   “Practicum” means a field-based experience in educator preparation that
          provides the prospective educator the opportunity to apply knowledge in
          the context of a school or other educational setting. Practicum is a
          requirement to add an additional category of teaching certification beyond
          a first area of teaching certification.

    33.   “Preliminary educator certificates” means certificates that allow educators
          who are not fully certified to serve as educators of record while pursuing
          certification. These certificates are not “full certificates” of the National
          Association of State Directors of Education and Certification (NASDTEC)
          certification system and do not qualify for certification in other states
          through reciprocity.

    34.   “Professional competencies” means the knowledge and skills defined in
          the Rhode Island Professional Teaching Standards, the Rhode Island
          Standards for Educational Leaders, and national professional associations
          that articulate the professional standards for all teachers, administrators,
          and support professionals.

    35.   “Professional educator certificate” means the second (2nd) level in the
          three (3) tier system of full certification. This level of certification is
          awarded to holders of Initial Educator Certificates once they complete the
          required professional learning units.

    36.   "Professional learning units" means the hours or demonstration of
          competencies as part of certification renewal requirements for all Full
          Certificates.

    37.   “Reciprocity route to educator certification” means the process by which
          Rhode Island issues certification to educators who completed approved
          educator preparation programs or hold full certification in another state.

    38.   “Reinstatement fee” means the fee charged to reinstate an expired
          certificate. The appropriate certification fee is also required for
          reinstatement.

    39.   “Regionally accredited institution” means a college or university that
          awards a bachelor’s or higher degree and, if located within the United
          States, is fully accredited by one (1) of the following regional accrediting
          bodies: Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools, New England
          Association of Schools and Colleges, North Central Association of
          Colleges and Schools, Northwest Association of Schools and Colleges,
5
          Southern Association of Colleges and Schools, and Western Association
          of Schools and Colleges.

    40.   “Rhode Island Professional Teaching Standards” or “RIPTS” means the
          standards that identify the professional knowledge and skills expected of
          all teachers.

    41.   “Rhode Island Standards for Education Leaders” or “RISEL” means the
          standards that identify the professional knowledge and skills expected of
          all administrators.

    42.   "Special provisional certificate" means issued to educators who hold
          Initial, Professional, or Advanced Educator Certificates and did not obtain
          approval or did not complete professional learning unit requirements. The
          Special Provisional Certificate can only be issued once during the time of
          an educator's career.

    43    “Substitute teacher” means an individual who is employed on a temporary
          basis to fill in for a teacher on a day to day or long-term basis.

    44.   “Support professional certificate” means issued to an educator, other than
          a teacher or administrator, who has primary responsibility as an
          instructional leader, a specialist/consultant, or a related service provider in
          schools.

    45.   “Support professional knowledge of field competencies” means the
          knowledge and skills established by the applicable national professional
          association as core competencies for support professionals that define the
          range of expectations for the specific support professional position(s)
          addressed by the certification area.

    46.   “Support professional knowledge of field testing” means the use of
          assessments to evaluate the knowledge of field and skills of a prospective
          support professional in the specific support professional area.

    47.   “Teacher certificate” means issued to a person whose primary
          responsibility is to instruct students.

    48.   “Teacher content competencies” means the knowledge and skills defined
          by professional associations as core content competencies for teachers
          within the specific certification content area.

    49.   “Teacher content testing” means the use of assessments to evaluate the
          content knowledge and skills of a prospective teacher in the specific
          teaching area.

    50.   “Temporary initial educator certificate” means a Preliminary Certificate
          issued for a limited duration to applicants who seek certification through
          reciprocity and who meet all requirements for the Initial Educator
6
            Certificate except for the testing requirement, including the English
            Language Competency Test when applicable. This certificate allows the
            applicant time to take the test that may not have been available in their
            state. The educator does not have a Rhode Island “Full Certificate” until
            the testing requirement is met and an Initial Educator Certificate is issued.

1.3   Rhode Island Professional Educator Standards
1.3.1 Educator Standards

A.    RIDE has established teaching and leadership standards, as well as a code of
      professional responsibility for educators in Rhode Island.

      1.    Rhode Island Professional Teaching Standards.

      2.    Rhode Island Standards for Educational Leadership.

      3.    Rhode Island Code of Professional Responsibility.

1.3.2 Rhode Island Professional Teaching Standards

A.    Teachers create learning experiences using a broad base of general knowledge
      that reflects an understanding of the nature of the communities and world in
      which we live.

      1.    Reflect a variety of academic, social, and cultural experiences in their
            teaching

      2.    Use a broad content knowledge base sufficient to create interdisciplinary
            learning experiences designed so that all students achieve state
            standards

      3.    Exhibit a commitment to learning about the changes in their disciplines
            and in our world that models a commitment to lifelong learning for
            students

      4.    Facilitate student involvement in the school and wider communities

      B.    Teachers have deep content knowledge sufficient to create learning
            experiences that reflect an understanding of the central concepts,
            structures, language, and tools of inquiry of the disciplines/content areas
            they teach.

      1.    Know their discipline/content areas and understand how knowledge in
            their discipline/content area is created, organized, linked to other
            disciplines, and applied beyond the school setting




7
     2.     Implement instruction that addresses the core skills, concepts, and ideas
            of the disciplines/content areas so that all students meet Rhode Island
            learning standards

     3.     Internalize curriculum to determine instructional moves to meet students’
            needs and help them meet Rhode Island’s learning standards

     4.     Select appropriate supplemental instructional materials and resources
            (including technological resources) based on student need,
            comprehensiveness, accuracy, and usefulness for representing ideas and
            concepts in the discipline/content areas

     5.     Facilitate student language to support students’ content knowledge

     6.     Engage students in active learning utilizing a variety of explanations and
            multiple representations of concepts, including analogies, metaphors,
            experiments, demonstrations, and illustrations, that help all students
            develop conceptual understanding

     7.     Represent and use differing viewpoints, theories, and methods of inquiry
            when teaching concepts and encourage all students to see, question, and
            interpret concepts from a variety of perspectives.

C.   Teachers create instructional opportunities that reflect an understanding of how
     students develop and learning.

     1.     Construct instruction to engage students to build on their prior knowledge,
            acquire skills, develop habits of mind, and strengthen positive dispositions
            as they take ownership of and construct new learning

     2.     Provide grade-level content instruction that meets the academic, linguistic,
            cognitive, social, and personal needs of all students

     3.     Utilize technology to enhance student learning and development

D.   Teachers create instructional opportunities that reflect a respect for the diversity
     of learners and an understanding of how students differ in their approaches to
     learning.

     1.     Design grade-level instruction and create scaffolds for individual
            differences (e.g., stage of development, English language acquisition,
            cultural background, learning differences) in approaches to learning

     2.     Use understanding of students (e.g., language proficiency, individual
            interests, prior learning, cultural background, native language,
            experiences) to create connections between the content and student
            experiences



8
     3.    Seek information about the impact of students’ specific challenges to
           learning or disabilities on classroom performance, and work with
           specialists to develop alternative instructional strategies to meet the needs
           of all students where appropriate

     4.    Implement appropriate accommodations and modifications for individual
           students who have identified learning differences or needs in an
           Individualized Educational Program (IEP), 504 Accommodation Plan,
           Personal Literacy Plans (PLP), or other approved school-based
           individualized learning plans (ILP)

     5.    Draw the cultural and language assets of Multilinguals and Multilingual
           Learners to engage them in rigorous academic instruction and discourse

     6.    Integrate academic language and content and provide ongoing
           assessment and feedback for all students

E.   Teachers create instructional opportunities to facilitate all students’ development
     of critical thinking, problem-solving, performance skills, and literacy across
     content areas.

     1.    Prepare for and deliver lessons that extend beyond factual recall and
           challenge students to develop higher level cognitive skills

     2.    Pose questions that encourage students to view, analyze, and interpret
           ideas from multiple perspectives

     3.    Make instructional decisions about when to provide information, when to
           clarify, when to pose a question, and when to let a student engage in
           productive struggle to solve a problem

     4.    Engage students in generating knowledge, testing hypotheses, and
           exploring methods of inquiry and standards of evidence

     5.     Engage students in exploration, discovery, and hands-on activities

F.   Teachers create a supportive learning environment that encourages appropriate
     positive social interaction, active engagement in learning, and self -motivation.

     1.    Use principles of effective classroom management to establish clear
           classroom norms and expectations

     2.    Establish a safe, secure, and nurturing learning environment that supports
           the active engagement of all students

     3.    Provide and structure the time necessary to explore important concepts
           and ideas



9
     4.    Facilitate a classroom environment characterized by mutual respect,
           intellectual risk-taking, and opportunities to develop skills in self-regulation

     5.    Create learning environments in which all students learn to work
           collaboratively and independently

     6.    Communicate clear expectations that allow all students to take
           responsibility and advocate for their own learning

     7.    Apply knowledge of social-emotional learning to lessons and interactions
           with students to create a classroom environment of respect and rapport
           that promotes a positive culture for learning in which students are actively
           engaging and taking pride in their work

     8.    Utilize culturally responsive pedagogy to effectively deliver instruction to
           engage and connect students to learning

G.   Teachers work collaboratively with all school personnel, families, and the broader
     community to create a professional learning community and environment that
     supports the implementation of teaching, learning, and student achievement.

     1.    Work collaboratively with colleagues to examine teacher practice, student
           learning, and assessment to improve instruction and student outcomes

     2.    Develop and foster partnerships with students and their families to support
           learning

     3.    Understand the role of community agencies in supporting schools and
           work collaboratively with them as appropriate

     4.    Incorporate social-emotional learning into their instruction and interactions
           with students

     5.    Utilize culturally responsive practices during all interactions with students
           and families

     6.    Engage in a multi-tiered system of support process to identify, support,
           and monitor student needs and progress

H.   Teachers use effective communication as the vehicle through which students
     explore, hypothesize, discuss, and investigate new ideas.

     1.    Use a variety of communication strategies (e.g., listening, restating ideas,
           questioning, offering counter arguments, modeling) to engage students in
           learning

     2.    Use a variety of modes of communication to promote student learning



10
     3.    Use technological advances in communication to enrich discourse in the
           classroom and the school

     4.    Emphasize oral and written communication through the instructional use
           of discussion, listening and responding to the ideas of others, student
           discourse, and group interaction

     5.    Seek knowledge of and demonstrate sensitivity to the communication
           needs of all students and families

I.   Teachers use appropriate formal and informal assessment strategies with
     individuals and groups of students to determine the impact of instruction on
     learning, to provide feedback, and plan future instruction.

     1.    Select and/or design individual and group classroom assessments based
           on their strengths, limitations, and provided data provided

     2.    Identify student and contextual variables that may influence performance
           so that a student’s performance can be validly interpreted

     3.    Systematically collect, synthesize, and interpret multiple data points to
           monitor, improve, and report growth and achievement

     4.    Provide students with opportunities and guidance to evaluate their own
           work and behavior utilizing defined criteria to establish individual learning
           goals

     5.    Provide students with timely, and actionable feedback on their progress
           toward goals

     6.    Maintain records of student learning and communicate student progress
           with students, families/guardians, and colleagues

     7.    Use student assessment data to reflect on own teaching, to inform
           instruction, and to construct professional development learning goals

J.   Teachers reflect on their practice and assume responsibility for their own
     professional learning by actively seeking and participating in opportunities to
     learn and grow as professionals.

     1.    Utilize feedback from students, families, and colleagues, including building
           leaders, to reflect on and improve their own teaching

     2.    Explore and evaluate the application of current research, instructional
           approaches and strategies, including technologies to improve student
           learning




11
     3.    Participate in and implement learning from workshops, courses, or other
           individual and collaborative professional learning activities that support
           their plans for continued development

     4.    Take responsibility for learning about and implementing federal, state,
           district and school initiatives to improve teaching and learning

K.   Teachers maintain professional standards guided by legal and ethical principles.

     1.    Maintain standards that require them to act in the best interests and needs
           of students

     2.    Follow district/school policies and procedures, respecting the boundaries
           of their professional responsibilities, when working with students,
           colleagues, and families

     3.    Follow local, state, and federal law pertaining to educational and
           instructional issues, including regulations related to students’, families’/
           guardians’, and teachers’ rights and responsibilities

     4.    Interact with students, colleagues, parents, and others in a professional
           manner that is fair and equitable

     5.    Are guided by codes of professional conduct adopted by their professional
           organizations

     6.     Use, store, and share data appropriately

1.3.3 Rhode Island Standards for Educational Leaders

A.   Standard 1. Mission, Vision, and Core Values – Effective educational leaders
     collaboratively develop, advocate, and enact a shared mission, vision, and core
     values of high-quality education and academic success and social and emotional
     well-being of each student.

     1.    Effective Leaders:

           a.     Collaboratively develop a mission for the district/school to promote
                  the academic success and social and emotional well-being of each
                  student.

           b.     Develop and promote a vision for the district/school, in collaboration
                  with members of the school community, on the successful learning
                  and development of each child and on instructional and
                  organizational practices that promote such practices.

           c.     Articulate, advocate, and cultivate core values that define the
                  district’s/school’s culture and stress the imperative of child-centered
                  education; high expectations and student support; equity,

12
                  inclusiveness, and social justice; openness, caring, and trust; and
                  continuous improvement.

           d.     Continuously review the district’s/school’s mission and vision and
                  make adjustments to changing expectations and opportunities for
                  the school, and changing needs and situations of students.

           e.     Develop a shared understanding of and commitment to the mission,
                  vision, and core values within the district/school and the
                  community.

           f.     Model and pursue the district’s/school’s mission, vision, and core
                  values as fundamental in all aspects of leadership.

B.   Standard 2. Ethics and Professional Responsibilities – Effective educational
     leaders act ethically and in accordance with professional standards to promote
     each student’s academic success and social and emotional well-being.

     1.    Effective Leaders:

           a.     Act ethically and professionally in personal conduct, relationships
                  with others, decision making, stewardship of the school’s
                  resources, and all aspects of school leadership.

           b.     Act according to and promote the professional traits of integrity,
                  fairness, transparency, trust, collaboration, perseverance, learning,
                  and continuous improvement.

           c.     Place the needs of children at the center of all educational decision
                  making and accept responsibility for each student’s academic and
                  social and emotional success.

           d.     Safeguard and promote the values of democracy, individual
                  freedom and responsibility, equity, social justice, community, and
                  diversity.

           e.     Lead with interpersonal and communication skill, social-emotional
                  insight, and understanding of all students’ and staff members’
                  backgrounds and cultures.

           f.     Provide moral direction for the district/school community and
                  promote expected ethical and professional behavior among all staff
                  and district/school community members.

C.   Standard 3. Equity and Cultural Responsiveness – Effective educational leaders
     ensure equity of educational opportunity and culturally responsive practices to
     promote each student’s academic success and social and emotional well-being.

     1.    Effective Leaders:
13
          a.    Act with cultural competence and responsiveness in all interactions,
                decision making, and practice and ensure that each student, staff
                member, and school community member is treated fairly,
                respectfully, and with an understanding of culture and context.

          b.    Recognize, respect, and employ each student’s strengths, diversity,
                and culture as assets for teaching and learning.

          c.    Ensure that each student has equitable access to effective
                teachers, learning opportunities, academic and social support, and
                other resources necessary for success.

          d.    Develop student policies and address student behavior in a
                positive, fair, and unbiased manner.

          e.    Confront and challenge institutional biases of student
                marginalization, deficit-based schooling, and low expectations
                associated with race, socio-economic status, culture and language,
                gender and sexual orientation, and disability or special status.

          f.    Prepare students to live productively in and contribute to the
                diverse cultural contexts of a global society.

          g.    Consider and address matters of equity and cultural
                responsiveness in all aspects of leadership.

     D.   Standard 4. Curriculum, Instruction, and Assessment – Effective
          educational leaders develop and support intellectually rigorous and
          coherent systems of curriculum, instruction, and assessment to promote
          each student’s academic success and social and emotional well-being.

     1.   Effective Leaders:

          a.    Implement coherent systems of curriculum, instruction, and
                assessment that promote the mission, vision, and core values of
                the school, embody high expectations for student learning, align
                with academic standards, and are culturally responsive.

          b.    Align and focus systems of curriculum, instruction, and assessment
                within and vertically across grade levels to promote student
                academic success, love of learning, the identities and habits of
                learners, and a healthy sense of self.

          c.    Facilitate instructional practice that is consistent with knowledge of
                student learning and development, effective pedagogy, and
                individual student needs.




14
           d.     Ensure instructional practices that are intellectually challenging, are
                  authentic to student experiences, recognize student strengths, and
                  are differentiated and personalized.

           e.     Promote and facilitate the effective use of technology in service of
                  teaching and learning.

           f.     Develop and utilize multiple valid assessments that are consistent
                  with knowledge of learning and development and technical
                  standards of measurement to monitor student progress and
                  improve instruction.

           g.     Use assessment data appropriately and with technical limitations to
                  monitor student progress and improve instruction.

     E.    Standard 5. Community of Care and Support for Students-Effective
           educational leaders cultivate an inclusive, caring, and supportive school
           community that promotes the academic success and the social and
           emotional well-being of each student.

     1.    Effective Leaders:

           a.     Build and maintain a safe, caring, and healthy school environment
                  that meets the academic, social emotional, and physical needs of
                  each student.

           b.     Create and sustain a school environment in which each student is
                  known, accepted and valued, trusted and respected, cared for, and
                  encouraged to be an active and responsible member of the school
                  community.

           c.     Develop and lead coherent systems of academic and social
                  supports, services, extracurricular activities, and accommodations
                  to meet the range of learning needs of each student.

           d.     Endorse and foster adult-student, student-peer, and school-
                  community relationships that value and support academic learning
                  and positive social and emotional development.

           e.     Cultivate and reinforce student engagement and leadership and
                  positive student behavior.

           f.     Infuse the district’s/school’s learning environment with the cultures
                  and languages of the community.

F.   Standard 6. Professional Capacity of School Personnel – Effective educational
     leaders, in collaboration with stakeholders, develop the professional capacity and
     practice of school personnel to promote each student’s academic success and
     well-being.
15
     1.    Effective Leaders:

           a.     Recruit, hire, support, develop, and retain effective and caring
                  teachers and other professional staff and ensure their development
                  into an educationally effective faculty.

           b.     Plan for and manage staff turnover and succession, providing
                  opportunities for effective induction and mentoring of personnel.

           c.     Develop teachers’ and staff members’ professional knowledge,
                  skills, and instructional practice through differentiated opportunities
                  for learning and growth, guided by an understanding of adult
                  professional learning and development of adults as professional
                  and ongoing learners.

           d.     Deliver actionable feedback about instruction and other
                  professional practice through valid, research -anchored systems of
                  supervision and evaluation to support the development of teachers’
                  and staff members’ knowledge, skills, and practice.

           e.     Empower and motivate teachers and staff to the highest levels of
                  professional practice and to continuous learning and improvement.

           f.     Develop the leadership capacity, opportunities, and support for
                  teacher leadership and for other professionals in the district.

           g.     Promote the personal and professional health, well-being, and
                  work-life balance of faculty and staff.

           h.     Tend to their own learning and effectiveness through reflection,
                  study, and improvement, while maintaining a healthy work-life
                  balance.

G.   Standard 7. Professional Community for Teachers and Staff – Effective
     educational leaders foster a professional community of teachers and other
     professional staff to promote each student’s academic success and social and
     emotional well-being.

     1.    Effective Leaders:

           a.     Support a workplace culture that is open, productive, caring, and
                  trusting.

           b.     Develop a culture for professional staff that promotes the
                  improvement of practice through research and effective
                  professional learning and promotes high levels of student learning.

           c.     Empower and entrust teachers and staff with collective
                  responsibility for meeting the academic, social, emotional, and
16
                  physical needs of each student, pursuant to the mission, vision, and
                  core values of the district/school.

           d.     Establish and sustain a professional culture of engagement and
                  commitment to shared vision, goals, and objectives pertaining to
                  the education of the whole child; high expectations for professional
                  work; ethical and equitable practice; trust and open communication;
                  collaboration, collective efficacy, and continuous individual and
                  organizational learning and improvement.

           e.     Ensure mutual accountability among teachers and other
                  professional staff for each student’s success and the effectiveness
                  of the school as a whole.

           f.     Design and implement job-embedded and other opportunities for
                  professional learning collaboratively with faculty and staff.

           g.     Provide opportunities for collaborative examination of practice,
                  collegial feedback, and collective learning.

           h.     Enable faculty-initiated improvement of programs and practices.

H.   Standard 8. Meaningful Engagement of Families an d Community – Effective
     educational leaders engage families and the community in meaningful,
     reciprocal, and mutually beneficial ways to promote each student’s academic
     success and well-being.

     1.    Effective Leaders:

           a.     Are approachable, accessible, and welcoming to families and
                  members of the community.

           b.     Create and sustain positive, collaborative, and productive
                  relationships with families and the community for the benefit of
                  students.

           c.     Engage in regular and open two-way communication with families
                  and the community about the district/school, students, needs,
                  problems, challenges, and accomplishments.

           d.     Maintain a presence in the community to understand its strengths
                  and needs, develop productive relationships, and engage its
                  resources for the district/school.

           e.     Create means for the school community to partner with families to
                  support student learning in and out of school.




17
           f.    Understand, value, and employ the community’s cultural,
                 intellectual, and political resources to promote student learning and
                 school empowerment.

           g.    Openly advocate for the district and school, and for the importance
                 of education and student needs and priorities with families and the
                 community.

           h.    Build and sustain productive partnerships with public and private
                 sectors to promote school improvement and student earning.

I.   Standard 9. Operations and Management – Effective educational leaders
     manage school operations and resources to promote each student’s academic
     success and well-being.

     1.    Effective Leaders:

           a.    Institute, manage, and monitor operations and administrative
                 systems that promote the mission and vision of the district/school.

           b.    Strategically manage staff resources, assigning and scheduling
                 educators and staff to roles and responsibilities that optimize their
                 professional capacity to address each student’s learning needs.

           c.    Acquire and manage fiscal, physical environment, and other
                 resources to support curriculum, instruction, and assessment;
                 student learning; professional capacity; and family and community
                 engagement.

           d.    Act responsibly and in an ethical manner with the district’s/school’s
                 monetary and nonmonetary resources, engaging in effective
                 budgeting, spending, and accounting practices.

           e.    Protect teachers’ and other staff members’ work and learning from
                 disruption and create an environment where students are able to
                 learn.

           f.    Employ systems to improve the quality and efficiency of operations
                 and management.

           g.    Develop and maintain data and communication systems to deliver
                 actionable information for classroom and school improvement.

           h.    Know, comply with, and help the district/school community
                 understand local, state, and federal laws, rights, policies, and
                 regulations so as to promote student success.




18
           i.     Develop productive professional relationships with the district office
                  staff, school staff, and the School Board so as to promote effective
                  transitions and student success.

           j.     Develop and administer systems for fair and equitable management
                  of conflict among students, faculty and staff, leaders, families, and
                  community.

           k.     Manage governance processes and internal and external politics
                  toward achieving the district’s/school’s mission and vision.

J.   Standard 10. School Improvement – Effective educational leaders act as agents
     of continuous improvement to promote each student’s academic success and
     well-being.

     1.    Effective Leaders:

           a.     Continuously seek to make school more effective for each student,
                  teachers and staff, families, and the community.

           b.     Use methods of continuous improvement to achieve the vision,
                  fulfill the mission, and promote the core values of the school.

           c.     Prepare the district/school and community for improvement,
                  promoting readiness, an imperative for improvement, instilling
                  mutual commitment and accountability, and developing the
                  knowledge, skills, and motivation to succeed in improvement.

           d.     Employ situationally appropriate strategies for improvement,
                  including transformational and incremental, adaptive approaches
                  and attention to different phases of implementation.

           e.     Assess and develop the capacity of staff to determine the value and
                  applicability of emerging educational trends and the findings of
                  research for the school and its improvement.

           f.     Adopt a system’s perspective and promote coherence among
                  improvement efforts and all aspects of the district/school
                  organization, programs, and services.

           g.     Develop technically appropriate systems of data collection,
                  management, analysis, and use, connecting as needed to the
                  district office and external partners for support in planning,
                  implementation, monitoring, feedback, and evaluation.

           h.     Manage uncertainty, risk, competing initiatives, and politics of
                  change with courage, resilience, and perseverance. Openly
                  communicate the need for the process of and outcomes of
                  improvement efforts.
19
            i.     Develop and promote systems of shared leadership among
                   teachers and staff for inquiry, experimentation, innovation, and
                   initiating and implementing improvement.

1.3.4 Rhode Island Code of Professional Responsibility

A.    Section 1. Responsibility to Students

      1.    Rhode Island educators’ first commitment is to ensure that all students
            achieve at the high levels needed to lead fulfilling and productive lives, to
            succeed in academic and employment settings, and to contribute to
            society.

      2.    Rhode Island educators shall:

            a.     Respect the inherent dignity and worth of each student.

            b.     Act upon the belief that all students can learn.

            c.     Establish high expectations and provide instruction that challenges
                   all students.

            d.     Recognize the differences among students and provide the
                   appropriate educational supports and instructional differentiation
                   responsive to individual needs.

            e.     Address the uniqueness of each student and endeavor to maximize
                   learning through personalization of the educational experience for
                   each student.

            f.     Promote the right and responsibility of students to explore ideas, to
                   develop skills, and to acquire knowledge necessary to be
                   contributing members of society.

            g.     Endeavor to present facts and provide access to all points of view
                   without deliberate distortion, bias, or personal prejudice.

            h.     Assure that their classrooms are environments characterized by
                   respect for and equal opportunity for all students, regardless of
                   race, ethnicity, national origin, language, gender, religion, economic
                   status, disability, or sexual orientation.

            i.     Promote the development of character and civic responsibility in
                   their students.

            j.     Maintain confidentiality of all student information and dispense that
                   information only when required by professional practice or state or
                   federal law.


20
           k.     Maintain a professional relationship with students at all times, both
                  in and outside the classroom.

B.   Section 2. Responsibility to Self

     1.    Rhode Island educators are committed to establishing high professional
           standards for their practice and striving to meet these standards through
           their individual performance.

     2.    Rhode Island educators shall:

           a.     Assume responsibility and accountability for their performance and
                  continually strive to demonstrate proficiency and currency in both
                  content knowledge and teaching skills.

           b.     Develop personal and professional goals with attention to
                  professional standards, student achievement, and school district
                  initiatives and implement a course of professional development to
                  support attaining the goals.

           c.     Actively engage in professional learning communities and seek
                  feedback in order to improve their performance.

           d.     Examine their practice on a regular basis to expand their
                  knowledge base, broaden their skills, and incorporate new ideas.

           e.     Pursue only those educational positions or assignments for which
                  they have the appropriate educational certification and credentials
                  and for which they have appropriate professional qualification.

           f.     Strive to exercise the highest level of professional judgment.

           g.     Refrain from using institutional or professional privileges for
                  personal advantage.

C.   Section 3. Responsibility to Colleagues and the Profession

     1.    Rhode Island educators are committed to work with school and district
           colleagues and as members of professional communities to establish and
           implement initiatives that will further student learning.

     2.    Rhode Island educators shall:

           a.     Work effectively with other professionals on curriculum
                  development, instructional initiatives, assessment programs, and
                  professional development.

           b.     Assume responsibility for working with colleagues to assure their
                  school meets local and state educational objectives.

21
           c.     Encourage and support staffing decisions that are made based on
                  the best interests of students.

           d.     Collaborate with others to improve student learning.

           e.     Support colleagues in developing and maintaining a work
                  environment that allows all educators to maintain their individual
                  professional integrity free of pressure to act in ways that are not in
                  the best interests of students.

           f.     Encourage the participation of teachers in the process of
                  educational decision making.

           g.     Encourage promising candidates who are interested in education to
                  learn about the opportunities and the challenges of a career in
                  education and support those who pursue careers through informal
                  induction into the profession as they develop the competence and
                  qualifications to become effective educators.

           h.     Maintain integrity regarding the acceptance of any gratuity, gift or
                  other compensation that might impair or influence professional
                  decisions or actions.

D.   Section 4. Responsibility to Parents, Families, and the Community

     1.    Rhode Island educators are committed to collaborate with parents,
           families, and communities to offer a quality education to all students.

     2.    Rhode Island educators shall:

           a.     Make concerted efforts to communicate with parents and families in
                  a way that shares all information necessary to become meaningful
                  partners in the child’s education.

           b.     Endeavor to understand and respect the values and traditions of
                  the diverse cultures represented in their community and in their
                  classrooms.

           c.     Endeavor to assure equal educational opportunities for all children
                  in the community.

           d.     Cooperate with community agencies that provide resources and
                  services to support students.

           e.     Maintain a positive and active relationship with students’
                  parents/guardians, families, and other members of the community.




22
            f.     Distinguish between their personal opinion and official policies of
                   the school or educational organization when communicating with
                   parents/guardians, families, and the community.

E.    Section 5. Responsibility to the Council on Elementary and Secondary Education

      1.    Rhode Island educators demonstrate a commitment to Rhode Island
            standards for educator quality through certification requirements and
            support for the implementation of state initiatives within their districts.

      2.    Rhode Island educators shall:

            a.     Provide accurate, truthful, and complete information to RIDE
                   concerning all certification matters.

            b.     Recognize that meeting certification requirements is a pre-condition
                   to any contractual agreement for a position that requires
                   certification in Rhode Island schools.

            c.     Engage in ongoing appropriate professional development for all
                   certificates they intend to maintain.

            d.     Accept only those assignments for which they are professionally
                   qualified and hold appropriate certification unless the educator and
                   the district have agreed to the assignment and the district has
                   secured prior approval from RIDE.

            e.     Develop an understanding of state initiatives and support the
                   implementation of these initiatives within their schools and districts.

            f.     Maintain the security of standardized testing materials that
                   comprise state assessment programs.

            g.     Further the mission, policies, and regulations of the Council on
                   Elementary and Secondary Education .

            h.     Abide by all applicable local, state, and federal laws.

1.4   Requirements for Certification
A.    Educator Certification Requirements

      1.    Pursuant to R.I. Gen. Laws § 16-11-1, educators in Rhode Island Public
            Schools are required to attain certification.

      2.    Educator certification is required for all educators in all Rhode Island
            Public Schools, state-approved Special Education programs, and state
            funded pre-kindergarten programs.


23
B.   School Committees and other Employing Agents Responsibilities

     1.    All school committees, school boards, charter schools, educational
           collaboratives, and other public school entities, including state-approved
           Special Education programs and state funded pre-kindergarten programs,
           employing educators shall ensure before employing an educator that a
           candidate holds a valid certificate appropriate for the position to be filled.
           In addition to meeting certification requirements, an educator’s
           competency in English must be determined prior to the educator being
           hired.

     2.    Employing agencies shall report to RIDE on the performance status and
           assignment of all employed educators.

     3.    Employing agencies shall supervise, either directly or through a
           designated representative, by regularly observing, guiding, and evaluating
           the performance of, holders of a certificate through an evaluation system
           approved by RIDE. Employing agencies shall report the results of
           evaluations of certified educators to RIDE.

     4.    Employing agencies shall ensure that principals participate in the process
           which determines and defines their salaries, benefits, and conditions of
           employment. Employing agencies are required to discuss and come to
           written agreement with principals on matters of salaries, benefits and
           conditions of employment. The School Committee may develop individual
           or group agreements.

     5.    Employing agencies shall report any person who is dismissed for fitness-
           related reasons to the Department of Education.

     6.    Employing agencies shall report the following to the Department of
           Education:

           a.     The arrest, indictment, or conviction of its certified educator for any
                  misdemeanor or felony.

           b.     Allegations that its certified educator has engaged in sexual or
                  romantic activity with a child or student.

           c.     Allegations that its certified educator has caused physical injury to a
                  child or student due to negligence or malice.

           d.     Information that its certified educator is the subject of a report filed
                  with the Child Abuse and Neglect Tracking System (CANTS) at the
                  Rhode Island Department of Children, Youth , and Families.

           e.     Any certified educator who has resigned, retired, or otherwise
                  separated from employment with the agency after it became aware
                  of an allegation that the educator engaged in misconduct.
24
            f.     Any certified educator who the agency has provided notice of intent
                   to dismiss, suspend, or place on leave for misconduct.

            g.     Reports must be filed in writing within fifteen (15) days of the
                   discovery of the occurrence of the reason requiring the filing of the
                   report. Reports must be filed with the Office of Educator Excellence
                   and Certification Services at RIDE.

1.5   Applications and Fees
A.    Application for Certification and Endorsements

      1.    Applications for state certificates and endorsements must be executed on
            forms or through electronic means provided by RIDE. Additional
            documents and materials must be submitted in accordance with the
            specific requirements for particular certificate areas or any new
            requirements adopted by the Council.

      2.    An applicant must submit all required documentation for each area of
            certification and, as appropriate, the following:

            a.     Application on an official form or through electronic means provided
                   by the Department of Education;

            b.     Application fee as established by the Council;

            c.     Official transcripts from an approved institution, as required, of all
                   credits and degrees issued by the registrar or other appropriate
                   official of the institution;

            d.     A statement made by an approved institution or alternate route to
                   certification program approved by the Commissioner that the
                   candidate has completed an approved planned program of
                   preparation for service in the area of certification and the grade
                   level for which certification is sought and has demonstrated
                   competence with respect to professional standards;

            e.     In those cases where successful experience as an educator is a
                   condition for certification, a statement from the applicant’s
                   employing agent as to the nature, length, and quality of experience;

            f.     Official verification from the testing agency that an applicant has
                   achieved a passing score or satisfactory evaluation on required
                   assessments;

            g.     If an applicant holds foreign credentials or transcripts, an evaluation
                   by agencies or organizations approved by the Department of
                   Education to translate and evaluate such credentials for the
                   purposes of determining eligibility for certification;
25
              h.     If an individual was prepared at an institution where the language of
                     instruction was not English, then the individual must also meet the
                     English Language Competency testing requirements;

              i.     An attestation by the applicant that he or she is of good moral
                     character, including disclosure of any employment, criminal, and
                     certification history; and

              j.     Additional documentation, as appropriate to the type of certificate or
                     endorsement requested.

B.     The following fees apply to applications for certification first issuance and/or
       certification renewal. All fees are non -refundable.

 Initial Educator Certificate                 One hundred dollars ($100.00) for first
                                              (1st) certification area and fifty dollars
                                              ($50.00) for each additional area

 Professional Educator Certificate            Two hundred dollars ($200.00) for first
                                              (1st) certification area and One hundred
                                              dollars ($100.00) for each additional area

 Advanced Educator Certificate                Two hundred dollars ($200.00) for first
                                              (1st) certification area and one hundred
                                              dollars ($100.00) for each additional area

 Alternate Route Preliminary Certificate      One hundred dollars ($100.00) for each
                                              certification area

 Career and Technical Education               Two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each
 Preliminary Certificate                      certification area

 Expert Residency Preliminary Certificate     Two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each
                                              certification area

 Fast-Track Principal Certificate             Two hundred dollars ($200.00)

 Emergency Preliminary Certificate            Two hundred dollars ($200.00) for each
                                              certification area

 Registered Apprenticeship Preliminary        One hundred dollars ($100.00) and fifty
 Certificate                                  dollars ($50.00) for renewal




26
 School Nurse Teacher Preliminary            Two hundred dollars ($200.00)
 Certificate

 International Teacher Certificate           One hundred dollars ($100.00) and fifty
                                             dollars ($50.00) for renewal

 Temporary Initial Preliminary Certificate   One hundred dollars ($100.00) for each
                                             certification area

 Special Provisional Certificate             Two hundred dollars ($200.00) plus
                                             certificate fees

 Other Fees

 Reinstatement of Certificate                One hundred dollars ($100.00) fee plus
                                             the certification fees

 Endorsements                                Zero dollars ($0.00)

1.6   General Requirements for Full Certificates
A.    The following requirements apply to all full certificates. Additional requirements
      that are unique to each certification area are provided in §§ 1.9, 1.10, and 1.11 of
      this Part.

      1.      Competency Requirements

              The preparation and certification of all educators shall be guided by
              professional competencies which are based on Rhode Island professional
              standards. The content knowledge and knowledge of field preparation and
              certification of all educators shall be guided by content competencies and
              knowledge of field competencies that are based on the accepted
              standards of the appropriate professional associations. The Professional
              Competencies for these purposes shall be recommended by the
              Commissioner of Education for approval by the Council. RIDE will
              periodically review competencies in light of changes in the profession and
              will publish the list of approved competencies annually.

      2.      Teacher Professional Competencies

              Any person who is seeking certification in a teaching area shall
              demonstrate competency with respect to the pedagogical knowledge
              articulated by the Rhode Island Professional Teaching Standards pursuant
              to § 1.3.2 of this Part.

27
     3.   Teacher Content Competencies

          Any person who is seeking certification in a teaching area shall
          demonstrate competency with respect to the content knowledge of the
          area of certification articulated by the relevant content professional
          association identified in the certification area Regulations pursuant to § 1.9
          of this Part.

     4.   Administrator Professional Competencies

          Any person who is seeking certification in an administrative area shall
          demonstrate competency with respect to the professional knowledge
          articulated by the Rhode Island Standards for Educational Leaders
          pursuant to § 1.3 of this Part.

     5.   Administrator Knowledge of Field Competencies

          Any person who is seeking certification in an administrative area shall
          demonstrate competency with respect to the knowledge of the field in the
          area of certification articulated by the relevant professional association
          identified in the certification area Regulations pursuant to § 1.10 of this
          Part.

B.   Assessment Requirements

     1.   Assessments based upon professional standards are required for all
          certification areas. Assessment instruments and passing scores shall be
          recommended by the Commissioner of Education for approval by the
          Council. RIDE shall maintain a current list of required assessments and
          passing scores.

          a.     Content Testing

                 Any person who is seeking an Educator Certificate in a teaching
                 area shall submit verification of minimum passing score or higher
                 on the assessment(s) of content applicable to the certification area
                 as approved by the Council.

                 (1)    Demonstration of Content Proficiency Pilot

                        (A)    By December 2026, RIDE will implement at least one
                               pilot opportunity for educators to demonstrate content
                               proficiency without submitting the required minimum
                               passing score.

                        (B)    An individual who scores within one (1) Standard
                               Error Measurement (SEM) of the required minimum
                               score on the appropriate content assessment may be
                               eligible for certification through this pilot pathway.
28
                  (2)    Prior to implementation, the Council will review and approve
                         the pilot design and requirements.

                  (3)    The Council will review this pilot in five (5) years for
                         continuing approval.

           b.     Knowledge of Field Testing

                  Any person who is seeking an Educator Certificate in an
                  administrative or support professional area shall submit verification
                  of minimum passing score or higher on the assessment applicable
                  to the certification area as approved by the Council.

           c.     English Language Competency

                  Any person who is seeking an Educator Certificate and who
                  prepared for certification at an institution where the language of
                  instruction was not English shall submit verification of minimum
                  passing score or higher on the assessment of English Language
                  Competency as approved by the Council.

           d.     Assessment Requirement Exemptions

                  RIDE may exempt certification areas from testing requirements
                  when an appropriate assessment cannot be identified.

C.   Field Experience Requirements

     1.    All applicants must demonstrate significant field experience as part of their
           preparation for certification.

     2.    Applicants for teacher certification must complete a one (1) year practical
           residency or the equivalent of a one (1) year practical residency, such as
           sixty (60) hours of field experience plus twenty-four (24) consecutive
           weeks of full-time student teaching or sixty (60) hours of field experience
           plus twenty-four (24) weeks of student teaching experiences distributed
           over the course of the program, inclusive of an intensive and continuous
           experience, and a minimum of sixty (60) hours of field experience prior to
           or following the one (1) year practical residency or equivalent.

     3.    Applicants for teacher certification who are adding a new certification area
           must complete an appropriate field experience that reflects the differences
           between current certification area and the new certification area.

           a.     Applicants eligible to add a new certification area through content
                  testing have satisfied the field experience requirement through prior
                  teaching experience.



29
      4.    Applicants for support professional certification as specialists/consultants,
            instructional leaders, or school counselors must complete an internship of
            at least three hundred (300) hours.

      5.    Applicants for building level administrator certification must complete an
            internship of at least three hundred (300) hours.

1.7   Initial Routes to Full Certification
A.    Prospective Educators earn full certification through:

      1.    Completion of a Rhode Island Approved Educator Preparation Program;

      2.    Reciprocity based on completion of an approved educator preparation
            program in another state within the last ten (10) years or holding a valid
            comparable certification in another state; or

      3.    Credential Review by a RIDE-approved consortium institution or, in cases
            where there are no approved preparation programs in Rhode Island, a
            credential review by RIDE; or

      4.    Completion of a Rhode Island Approved Performance Review Pilot
            Program.

B.    Eligibility for Certification by Completing a Rhode Island Approved Educator
      Certification Program

      1.    Prospective Educators attain certification by completing a Rhode Island
            Approved Program for Educator Certification and demonstrating that they
            meet all other certification requirements. RIDE shall review and approve
            programs that demonstrate they meet the Standards for Educator
            Preparation Programs in Rhode Island.

      2.    Applicants eligible for certification through completion of a Rhode Island
            Approved Certification Program receive an Educator Certificate upon
            submittal of:

            a.     Application on an official form or through electronic means provided
                   by RIDE;

            b.     Application fee as established by the Council;

            c.     Official transcripts from an approved institution, as required, of all
                   credits and degrees, issued by the registrar or other appropriate
                   official of the institution;

            d.     A statement made by an approved institution or an alternate route
                   to certification program approved by the Commissioner of
                   Education that the candidate has completed an approved planned
30
                   program of preparation within the last ten (10) years for service in
                   the area of certification and the grade level for which certification is
                   sought and has demonstrated competence with respect to
                   professional standards;

            e.     Official verification from the testing agency that an applicant has
                   achieved a passing score or satisfactory evaluation on required
                   Rhode Island assessments;

            f.     An attestation by the applicant that he or she is of good moral
                   character, including disclosure of any employment, criminal, and
                   certification history; and

            g.     Additional documentation as appropriate to the type of certificate
                   requested.

C.   Eligibility for Certification through Reciprocity with Other States

     1.     Applicants can attain certification by completing an Approved Program for
            Educator Certification in a state other than Rhode Island or by
            demonstrating that they hold a currently valid full certificate in another
            state. Reciprocity is recognition of preparation or certification in another
            state as comparable to Rhode Island. Individuals seeking certification
            through reciprocity must demonstrate that they meet Rhode Island testing
            requirements in the areas(s) of certification or have three (3) years of
            effective teaching experience unless the individual is seeking reciprocity
            through the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, the Commonwealth of
            Virginia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, State of Alabama, the State
            of Connecticut, the State of Delaware, the District of Columbia, the State
            of Florida, the State of Georgia, the State of Illinois, the State of Indiana, ,
            the State of Maine, the State of Maryland, the State of Michigan, the State
            of New Hampshire, the State of New Jersey, the State of New York, the
            State of North Carolina, the State of Ohio, the Commonwealth of
            Pennsylvania, the State of South Carolina, the State of Tennessee, the
            State of Vermont, or the State of Wisconsin as provided in § 1.7(D)(2) of
            this Part. If the individual was prepared at an institution where the
            language of instruction was not English, then the individual must also
            meet the English Language Competency testing requirements.

     2.     Applicants from the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, the
            Commonwealth of Virginia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the State
            of Alabama, the State of Connecticut, the State of Delaware, the District of
            Columbia, the State of Florida, the State of Georgia, the State of Illinois,
            the State of Indiana, the State of Maine, the State of Maryland, the State
            of Michigan, the State of New Hampshire, the State of New Jersey, the
            State of New York, the State of North Carolina, the State of Ohio, the
            Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the State of South Carolina, the State of
            Tennessee, the State of Vermont, or the State of Wisconsin who hold full

31
            certification in those states are eligible for reciprocity without any
            additional requirements.

     3.     Applicants eligible for certification through reciprocity receive an Initial
            Educator Certificate upon submittal of:

            a.     Application on an official form or through electronic means provided
                   by RIDE;

            b.     Application fee as established by the Council;

            c.     Official transcripts from an approved institution, as required, of all
                   credits and degrees, issued by the registrar or other appropriate
                   official of the institution;

            d.     A statement made by an approved institution or alternate route to
                   certification program in a state other than Rhode Island that the
                   candidate has completed an approved planned program of
                   preparation within the last ten (10) years for service in the area of
                   certification and the grade level for which certification is sought and
                   has demonstrated competence with respect to professional
                   standards OR a copy of a currently valid full certificate from another
                   state;

            e.     Official verification from the testing agency that an applicant has
                   achieved a passing score on required Rhode Island assessments, if
                   applicable, or provides evidence of three years of effective teaching
                   experience;

            f.     An attestation by the applicant that he or she is of good moral
                   character, including disclosure of any employment, criminal, and
                   certification history; and

            g.     Additional documentation, as appropriate to the type of certificate or
                   endorsement requested.

D.   Eligibility for Certification through Credential Review

     1.     Applicants can attain certification by submitting credentials that
            demonstrate they meet all certification requirements to a RIDE-approved
            credential review consortium institution for review.

     2.     Applicants eligible for certification through credential review in Rhode
            Island will be reviewed upon submittal of:

            a.     Application on an official form or through electronic means provided
                   by RIDE;

            b.     Application fee as established by the Council;
32
          c.    Official transcripts from a regionally accredited institution, as
                required, of all credits and degrees, issued by the registrar or other
                appropriate official of the institution;

          d.    A bachelor’s degree for all teachers (in areas where required), an
                advanced degree for all administrators except School Business
                Administrator, or an advanced degree for all support professionals;

          e.    Evidence of performance consistent with the competencies,
                assessment and field experiences required of all certificates as
                described in § 1.6 of this Part;

                (1)    The one (1) year practical residency or equivalent may be
                       waived for an applicant who has had two (2) or more
                       documented years of successful teaching experience in an
                       approved setting.

          f.    Official verification from the testing agency that an applicant has
                achieved a passing score or satisfactory evaluation on required
                Rhode Island assessments, if applicable;

          g.    An attestation by the applicant that he or she is of good moral
                character, including disclosure of any employment, criminal, and
                certification history; and

          h.    Additional documentation, as appropriate to the type of certificate
                requested.

     3.   Applicants eligible for certification through credential review for
          certification as Superintendent of Schools will be reviewed upon submittal
          of:

          a.    Application on an official form or through electronic means provided
                by RIDE;

          b.    Application fee as established by the Council;

          c.    Official transcripts from an approved institution, as required, of all
                credits and degrees, issued by the registrar or other appropriate
                official of the institution;

          d.    An advanced degree;

          e.    Evidence of significant leadership experience in organizations other
                than schools, including:

                (1)    Professional Experience at a senior level in government,
                       private sector organizations, or the military including
                       significant operational responsibility and broad general
33
                         management experiences, management of complex
                         businesses or business units, or military command
                         experience;

                  (2)    Organizational Leadership Experience that demonstrates
                         strong analytic and problem-solving skills and the energy,
                         determination, and perseverance to act as an agent of
                         change in a demanding organization; and

                  (3)    Interpersonal Leadership Experience that demonstrates
                         strong communication skills and the ability to manage
                         complex political relationships.

           f.     Official verification from the testing agency that an applicant has
                  achieved a passing score or satisfactory evaluation on required
                  Rhode Island assessments;

           g      An attestation by the applicant that he or she is of good moral
                  character, including disclosure of any employment, criminal, and
                  certification history; and

           h.     Additional documentation, as appropriate to the type of certificate or
                  endorsement requested.

E.   Eligibility for Certification through Performance Review Pilot Program

     1.    By December 2026, RIDE will implement at least one pilot opportunity for
           educators to attain certification through a performance review program.

     2.    Applicants can attain certification by completing a Rhode Island-approved
           Performance Review Pilot Program and meeting the following
           requirements:

           a.     Possession of a valid Rhode Island Expert Residency Certificate;

           b.     At least two full years of employment in the role of certification area
                  sought;

           c.     Documentation of seminars, courses, and experience relevant to
                  the Rhode Island Professional Teaching Standards;

           d.     Successful completion of a RIDE-approved performance review
                  program;

           e.     A recommendation from the principal, superintendent, or assistant
                  superintendent of the current school/district where the candidate is
                  employed under the expert residency certificate in the role of the
                  certification sought; and


34
             f.     Completion of an induction and mentoring program.

      3.     Prior to implementation, the Council will review and approve the pilot
             design and requirements.

      4.     The Council will review this pilot in five (5) years for continuing approval.

1.8   Types of Certificates
1.8.1 Full Certificates

A.    Full certification is awarded to applicants who have completed all Rhode Island
      preparation requirements for certification. RIDE issues the following three (3)
      types of full certificates: Initial Educator Certificate; Professional Educator
      Certificate; and Advanced Educator Certificate. The Initial Educator Certificate,
      Professional Educator Certificate, and Advanced Educator Certificate provide a
      three (3) tiered system of certification that recognizes different stages of
      development and accomplishment within the profession.

      1.     The Initial Educator Certificate is the first (1st) full certificate issued to an
             individual who meets all Rhode Island certification requirements.

      2.     The Professional Educator Certificate is the second (2nd) full certificate
             issued to an individual. An individual attains a Professional Educator
             Certificate after completing the required professional learning units while
             working under an Initial Educator Certificate.

      3.     The Advanced Educator certificate is issued to an individual by meeting
             one (1) of the aspirational benchmarks identified by RIDE and completing
             the required professional learning units while working under a Professional
             Educator Certificate.

B.    All full certificates share a common expiration date. The Commissioner of
      Education shall recommend for approval by the Council a common expiration
      date. Educators with certification in more than one (1) area shall be assigned a
      common expiration year for all certificates. All full certificates can be renewed by
      meeting applicable requirements, but satisfaction of renewal requirements does
      not preclude an action to revoke a certificate pursuant to R.I. Gen. Laws § 16-11-
      4.

1.8.2 Initial Educator Certificate

A.    The first (1st) level of full certification issued to an applicant who meets the
      following criteria is an Initial Educator Certificate.

      1.     Duration

             The Initial Educator Certificate is valid for three (3) years.

35
     2.   Conditions for Issuance

          a.    The applicant meets the degree requirements for the certification
                area with a degree from a regionally accredited approved
                institution;

          b.    The applicant is eligible for certification through the completion of a
                Rhode Island Approved Educator Preparation Program, reciprocity,
                Rhode Island Approved Performance Review Program, or
                credential review;

          c.    The applicant meets all competency and assessment requirements;
                and

          d.    The applicant meets any additional certification area requirements
                as specified in §§ 1.9, 1.10, and 1.11 of this Part.

     3.   Conditions for Renewal

          a.    The applicant must comply with the professional learning
                requirements outlined in this Part in order to renew their certificate.

          b.    Beginning in 2025, the professional learning units under § 1.8.5 of
                this Part will be required for renewal and progression to a
                Professional Certificate. Ninety (90) professional learning units will
                be required.

          c.    If the applicant has accumulated the appropriate number of
                professional learning units during the term of the three (3) year
                Initial Educator Certificate, it may be renewed as a five (5) year
                Professional Educator Certificate.

                (1)     If the applicant was employed for one (1) or two (2) years,
                        but not three (3) years the certificate will be renewed as a
                        three (3) year Initial Educator Certificate.

                (2)     If the applicant was not employed in a publicly funded
                        educational setting the certificate will be renewed as a three
                        (3) year Initial Educator Certificate.

                (3)     If the applicant was employed in a publicly funded
                        educational setting, but was on leave for one (1) or more
                        years, a prorated number of units will be submitted with a
                        letter confirming leave status. The prorated number of units
                        will be equal to the number of units required during the
                        phase-in period or thirty (30) units per year beginning in
                        2025.

     4.   Non-renewal
36
            If an applicant for renewal did not obtain employer approval or did not
            complete the required units, the certificate will not be renewed. The
            applicant may be eligible for the Special Provisional Certificate pursuant to
            § 1.8.18 of this Part.

1.8.3 Professional Educator Certificate

A.    The second (2nd) level of full certification issued to an applicant who
      demonstrates successful practice and meets the following criteria is a
      Professional Educator Certificate.

      1.    Duration

            The Professional Educator Certificate is valid for five (5) years.

      2.    Conditions for Issuance

            a.      The applicant holds an Initial Educator Certificate;

            b.      The applicant completed three (3) years working in a Rhode Island
                    publicly funded educational setting under the Initial Educator
                    Certificate; and

            c.      The applicant completed the appropriate number of professional
                    learning units.

      3.    Conditions for Renewal

            a.      The applicant must comply with the professional learning
                    requirements outlined in this Part in order to renew their certificate.

            b.      Beginning with certificates expiring on August 31, 2020, the
                    professional learning units under § 1.8.5 of this Part will be required
                    for renewal. The number of professional learning units required will
                    be phased in between 2020 and 2030. Beginning in 2030, the full
                    one hundred (100) professional learning units will be required for
                    the renewal of all Professional Certificates

            c.      Individuals who hold an Initial Certificate th at expires between 2020
                    and 2025 and are issued a Professional Certificate between 2020
                    and 2025 will submit the professional learning units outlined in the
                    chart below.

             Year of Certificate           Formula to Prorate      Total Units to Be
             Renewal                       Units                   Competed for
                                                                   Renewal

             2025                          5x20                    One Hundred (100)

37
      2026                          5x20                    One Hundred (100)

      2027                          5x20                    One Hundred (100)

      2028                          5x20                    One Hundred (100)

      2029                          5x20                    One Hundred (100)

      2030                          5x20                    One Hundred (100)

     d.      Individuals who already hold a Professional Certificate or Advanced
             Certificate as of December 31, 2019 will submit the professional
             learning units outlined in the chart below.

      Year of Certificate        Formula to Prorate        Total Units to Be
      Renewal                    Units                     Completed for
                                                           Renewal

      2025                       5x15                      Seventy-Five (75)

      2026                       4x15; 1x20                Eighty (80)

      2027                       3x15; 2x20                Eighty-Five (85)

      2028                       2x15; 3x20                Ninety (90)

      2029                       1x15; 4x20                Ninety-Five (95)

      2030                       5x20                      One Hundred (100)

     e.      If the applicant has completed the appropriate number of
             professional learning units during the terms of the five (5) year
             Professional Educator Certificate, it may be renewed as a five (5)
             year Professional Educator Certificate.

     f.      Professional learning units earned for one (1) certificate may be
             applied to the renewal of additional certificates. See § 1.8.5 of this
             Part for more information about allowable professional learning
             units.

             (1)    If the applicant was employed for less than the five (5) years
                    of the certificate, the certificate will be renewed as a

38
                          Professional Educator Certificate without the submission of
                          professional learning units.

                   (2)    If the applicant was not employed in a publicly funded
                          educational setting during the five (5) years the certificate
                          will be renewed as a five (5) year Professional Educator
                          Certificate. Applicants who are not employed in publicly
                          funded settings are not required to submit evidence of
                          performance or professional learning units.

                   (3)    If the applicant was employed in a publicly funded
                          educational setting but was on leave for one (1) or more
                          years, a prorated number of units will be submitted with a
                          letter confirming leave status. The prorated number of units
                          will be equal to the number of units required during the
                          phase-in period.

      4.    Non-renewal

            If an applicant for renewal did not obtain employer approval or did not
            complete the required units, the certificate will not be renewed. The
            applicant may be eligible for the Special Provisional Certificate pursuant to
            § 1.8.18 of this Part.

1.8.4 Advanced Educator Certificate

A.    The third (3rd) level of full certification issued to an applicant who demonstrates
      accomplished practice and meets the following criteria is an Advanced Educator
      Certificate.

      1.    Duration

            The Advanced Educator Certificate is valid for seven (7) years.

      2.    Conditions for Issuance

            a.     The applicant holds a Professional Educator Certificate;

            b.     The applicant completed five (5) years working in a Rhode Island
                   publicly funded educational setting under the Professional Educator
                   Certificate;

            c.     The applicant completed the appropriate number of approved
                   professional learning units; and

            d.     The applicant achieves one (1) of the aspirational benchmarks
                   listed below, during the term of the certificate being renewed.

                   (1)    National Board Educator Certification in certification area; or

39
                 (2)    Receives RIDE or national recognition as a Milken educator,
                        State Teacher of the Year, or Presidential Award Winner for
                        Math or Science during the certification cycle, RIDE-
                        recognized national or regional awards in certificate area; or

                 (3)    Receives Certificate of Completion of NISL Executive
                        Development Program, or serves as a NISL Facilitator
                        and/or NISL Content Facilitator; or

                 (4)    Completion of a RIDE-approved leadership development
                        program; or

                 (5)    Earns Master license in their Career and Technical
                        Education field; or

                 (6)    Completion of a RIDE-approved coaching and mentoring
                        program aligned to the work of a clinical educator; or

                 (7)    Achieves additional RIDE certification ; or

                 (8)    Conferral of an advanced degree from an accredited
                        institution of higher learning during the term of the certificate
                        being renewed in a subject directly related to the content
                        knowledge required to teach or lead under the certificate
                        being renewed.

                        (A)      Applicants who earn an advanced degree, as defined
                                 above, in the area of their certification during the term
                                 of the certificate are eligible to remain on an
                                 advanced certificate at renewal with the completion of
                                 the appropriate number of professional learning units.

     3.   Conditions for Renewal

          a.     Beginning with certificates expiring on August 31, 2020, the
                 professional learning units under § 1.8.5 of this Part will be required
                 for renewal.

          b      The number of professional learning units required will be phased
                 in between 2020 and 2030. In 2030, the full one hundred (100)
                 professional learning units will be required.

          c.     Individuals who already hold a Professional Certificate or Advanced
                 Certificate as of December 31, 2019 will submit the professional
                 learning units outlined in the chart below.

           Year of Certificate         Formula to Prorate         Total Units to
           Renewal                     Units                      Be

40
                                                           Completed
                                                           for Renewal

      2025                       5x15                      Seventy-Five
                                                           (75)

      2026                       4x15; 1x20                Eighty (80)

      2027                       3x15; 2x20                Eighty-Five
                                                           (85)

      2028                       2x15; 3x20                Ninety (90)

      2029                       1x15; 4x20                Ninety-Five
                                                           (95)

      2030                       5x20                      One Hundred
                                                           (100)

     d.      Beginning in 2030, the applicant is responsible for submitting the
             full, one hundred (100) units, required to renew the certificate as
             described in § 1.8.5.

             (1)   If the applicant was employed less than the five (5) years of
                   the certificate, the certificate will be renewed as a
                   Professional Educator Certificate without the submission of
                   professional learning units.

             (2)   If the applicant was not employed in a publicly funded
                   educational setting during the seven (7) years of the
                   certificate, the certificate will be renewed as a five (5) year
                   Professional Educator Certificate. Applicants who are not
                   employed in publicly funded settings do not submit evidence
                   of performance or professional learning units.

             (3)   If the applicant was employed in a publicly funded
                   educational setting, but was on leave for one (1) or more
                   years, a prorated number of hours will be submitted with a
                   letter confirming leave status. The prorated number of units
                   will be equal to the number of units required during the
                   phase-in period.

             (4)   If the applicant has accumulated one hundred (100)
                   professional learning units and has met the aspirational
                   benchmarks and performance expectations during the term

41
                          of the certificate outlined above, the certificate may be
                          renewed as a seven (7) year Advanced Educator Certificate.

                   (5)    If the applicant has accumulated one hundred (100)
                          professional learning units and performance expectations
                          but has not met aspirational benchmarks, the certificate may
                          be renewed as a five (5) year professional.

      4.    Non-renewal based

            If an applicant for renewal did not complete the required units, the
            certificate will not be renewed. The applicant may be eligible for the
            Special Provisional Certificate pursuant to § 1.8.18 of this Part.

1.8.5 Professional Learning Units

A.    Professional Learning Units (PLUs) are accrued for the purpose of demonstrating
      ongoing professional learning. The accumulation of these units is a requiremen t
      for renewing educator certificates. These units represent ongoing learning and
      are earned as a result of professional learning activities that are designed to
      increase educator effectiveness. Ongoing learning is an important and necessary
      responsibility of educators as they maintain the knowledge and skills needed to
      educate students.

B.    Educators are responsible for the completion of all PLUs, as PLUs are a
      condition of the renewal of educator certificates. Local Education Agencies
      (LEAs) may, in accordance with LEA discretion and/or local agreements, make
      available some or all of these PLUs for its employed educators.

C.    Each LEA that employs educators shall develop, in collaboration with the
      employed educators, an LEA professional learning plan that includes the
      provisions outlined below.

      1.    Identification of needs and interests of all educators based on analysis of
            student data, educator evaluation information, surveys, and needs
            assessments.

      2.    Alignment to educator needs, as well as district and school needs, through
            review of district strategic plans, school improvement plans, surveys, and
            other information.

      3.    Examples of allowable activities consistent with these Regulations.

      4.    Mechanisms for the approval of educator professional learning consistent
            with these Regulations and the local resolution of disputes.

      5.    Structures and plans to ensure opportunities for professional learning
            activities that take place within the school context over time and are
            ongoing including, but not limited to, data analysis meetings, student work
42
           review teams, curriculum implementation teams, improvement cycle
           activities, induction activities, mentoring activities, and structured
           professional learning communities, rather than only reliance on one-time
           activities.

     6.    Alignment and differentiation of professional learning to ensure
           opportunities that are relevant to teachers' certified areas, administrators,
           and support professionals.

D.   All educator PLUs for employees of a LEA shall be approved by the
     superintendent of the LEA or his/her designee and, once the LEA professional
     learning plan is operative, be consistent with the LEA professional learning plan.
     In any instance where these Regulations and the LEA professional learning plan
     are in conflict, these Regulations shall take precedence. PLUs for
     superintendents shall be approved by the Chair of the School Committee. The
     Commissioner of Education shall have the authority to approve specific PLU
     offerings for all Rhode Island certified educators.

E.   Activities for Professional Learning Units

     1.    Site-Based Professional Learning activities, such as: induction activities,
           mentoring activities, structured professional learning communities, data
           analysis meetings, local workshops, lesson study, student work review
           sessions, curriculum implementation teams, and other site-based activities
           designed to improve teaching and learning.

     2.    Structured coaching that involves trained coaches working with colleagues
           on focused objectives through observation an d feedback cycles. Coaching
           may take the form of induction coaching for beginning teachers or peer
           coaching and instructional coaching.

     3.    Proficiency-based learning and micro-credentials activities that require the
           educator to demonstrate proficiency in a new skill by submitting evidence
           of mastery. Micro-credentials often require educators to submit evidence
           to third (3rd) party providers for review.

     4.    University coursework at accredited institutions of higher education.

     5.    National Board Certification is a recognized form of professional learning
           that may be used to accumulate units. Educators may receive units for
           completing individual components even if the certification is not achieved.

     6.    External conferences or workshops led by external organizations
           encompassing a wide range of learning opportunities. Short-term or stand-
           alone workshops can be counted for limited units.

     7.    Activities that may count toward the accumulation of professional learning
           units are those that develop content knowledge, pedagogical knowledge,
           pedagogical content knowledge, curriculum implementation knowledge or
43
           enhance educator effectiveness. These activities may be facilitated in
           many ways including, but not limited to, third (3rd) parties not regularly
           employed by the LEA and other educators regularly employed by the LEA,
           such as a professional learning community focused on a professional
           problem of practice.

     8.    Activities that do not directly relate to improving educator practices, such
           as general logistics, school daily operations, safety trainings, and most
           committee work do not qualify for professional learning units. These are
           important activities for schools, but are not considered professional
           learning.

F.   Assigning Unit Values to Activities – In order to recognize hours-based and
     competency-based professional learning experiences, RIDE will use professional
     learning units as its measure for documenting professional learning. Conversions
     will be needed to accommodate different learning activities.

     1.    One (1) hour of a professional learning activity is equal to one (1)
           professional learning unit. For tracking purposes, rounding to the nearest
           half-hour is appropriate.

     2.    One (1) college credit is equal to fifteen (15) professional learning units.

     3.    One (1) demonstrated competency in proficiency-based or competency-
           based learning is equal to five to ten (5 to 10) professional learning units,
           determined by the Superintendent based on the rigor of the competency
           expectations.

     4.    National Board Certification activities:

           a.     One (1) component is equal to forty-five (45) professional learning
                  units.

           b.     Completion is equal to one hundred eighty (180) units.

           c.     Renewal is equal to ninety (90) units.

G.   RIDE will continue to study research -based competency approaches to
     certification renewal and will make future recommendations that reduce the
     reliance on a number of units and emphasizes growth in professional practice.

H.   RIDE will engage with teachers' unions and LEA leadership to provide model
     Professional Learning Plans and to review and evaluate the quality of
     professional learning experiences.

I.   Record Keeping and Documentation




44
      1.    Educators must maintain records of all activities and make them available
            upon request by RIDE. All records must attest to participation by the
            educator in the activity and the professional learning units earned.

      2.    Employers verify locally that educators met renewal requirements.
            Documentation of verification shall be provided to the educator for
            certification renewal.

      3.    Educators must submit employer verification forms to RIDE as part of the
            renewal process.

J.    Audits of Professional Learning Units

      1.    In order to ensure the efficacy of the professional learning unit system,
            RIDE will audit renewal applications.

      2.    Educators selected for audit must submit documentation for all activities
            submitted for certificate renewal.

      3.    Failure to submit required documentation will result in non -renewal of
            certificates.

1.8.6 Preliminary Certificates

A.    Preliminary certification is awarded to candidates who are not eligible for full
      certification, but who have met specific criteria that qualify them to serve as
      educators of record while completing all certification requirements. RIDE issues
      the following nine (9) types of Preliminary Certificates: Alternate Route
      Preliminary Certificate; Career and Technical Education Preliminary Certificate;
      Emergency Preliminary Certificate; Expert Residency Preliminary Certificate;
      Fast-track Principal Preliminary Certificate; International Teacher Preliminary
      Certificate; Registered Apprenticeship Preliminary Certificate, School Nurse
      Teacher Preliminary Certificate; and Temporary Initial Educator Preliminary
      Certificate.

B.    All Preliminary Certificates can be renewed by meeting applicable requirements,
      but satisfaction of renewal requirements does not preclude an action to revoke a
      certificate pursuant to R.I. Gen. Laws § 16-11-4.

C.    Generally, educators may not be assigned to positions out of their certification
      areas. To minimize the use of Emergency Preliminary Certifications, employing
      agencies should seek to fill positions through the use of the following Preliminary
      Certificates: Alternate Route Preliminary Certificates, Career and Technical
      Education Preliminary Certificates, Expert Residency Preliminary Certificates,
      School Nurse Teacher Preliminary, Fast-track Principal Preliminary Certificate,
      Registered Apprenticeship Preliminary, and Temporary Initial Educator
      Preliminary Certificates. These Preliminary Certifications provide a basis for
      identifying the most qualified personnel for these vacancies.

45
D.    Employing agencies that hire educators working under a Preliminary Certificate
      shall evaluate and provide meaningful support to these educators.

E.    A person who holds a Preliminary Certificate is not “fully certified.” Employment
      under the authority of a Preliminary Certificate does not constitute teaching
      service for purposes of the teacher tenure probationary period.

1.8.7 Alternate Route Preliminary Certificate

A.    The Alternate Route Preliminary Certificate is issued to individuals who are
      enrolled in an approved Rhode Island Alternate Route Program, § 1.8.8 of this
      Part, and who have been offered employment by a Rhode Island school district.

      1.    Duration

            The Alternate Route Preliminary Certificate is valid for one (1) year.

      2.    Conditions for Issuance

            a.     The applicant for a certificate in a teaching area holds a bachelor’s
                   degree and the applicant for an administrative area (except for
                   School Business Administrator) or a support professional area
                   holds an advanced degree from a regionally accredited institution;

            b.     The applicant for a certificate in a teaching area has passed all
                   content testing requirements;

            c.     The applicant for a certificate in an administrative or support
                   professional area has passed all knowledge of field assessment
                   requirements;

            d.     The applicant is enrolled in a Rhode Island approved educator
                   preparation program;

            e.     The applicant has successfully completed a pre-service field
                   experience as part of preparation;

            f.     An employing agency has offered the applicant employment and
                   the preparation program and the agency jointly request the
                   certificate; and

            g.     The certificate is valid only for the employing agency of the
                   assignment.

      3.    Conditions for Renewal

            a.     The preparation program and the employing agency recommend
                   renewal based on the educator’s performance in the assignment
                   and progress in the preparation program.

46
           b.     The Alternate Route Preliminary Certificate can be renewed one (1)
                  time.

     4.    Certification Areas

           All teacher, administrator, and support professional areas are included.

1.8.8 Rhode Island Alternate Route Program Standards

A.   Applicants can attain certification by completing a Rhode Island Approved
     Program for Educator Certification that is designed to prepare individuals working
     on an Alternate Route Preliminary Certificate. Alternate Route to Certification
     Programs meet the following standards:

     1.    Purpose – In order to ensure that every child is served by well-prepared
           educators in both professional expertise and content area knowledge, the
           Rhode Island Department of Education may approve alternative educator
           preparation programs. Programs may be designed to serve any of the
           following purposes:

           a.     Meet the demand for qualified teachers in high need certification
                  areas. Recruit teachers to staff schools in high need LEAs.

           b.     Increase the number of qualified candidates from groups that are
                  underrepresented in the Rhode Island teaching force.

           c.     Provide rigorous, high-quality preparation through an expedited
                  track to certification. Attract highly motivated individuals who bring
                  content expertise to the profession.

     2.    The following definitions apply to this section:

           a.     “Alternative educator preparation program” means a program that
                  provides preparation to educator candidates who serve as teachers
                  of record while completing the approved program. These programs
                  may be offered by an institution of higher education, a professional
                  organization, or a private service provider.

           b.     “Teacher-of-record” means:

                  (1)    Teachers that are responsible for content instruction and
                         determining student grades, or

                  (2)    Administrators or other education service providers that
                         perform the functions allowed by their program certificate
                         area.

     3.    Approval of program. To be approved by the Rhode Island Department of
           Education an alternative educator preparation program must:

47
          a.    Meet the Performance Review for Educator Preparation -RI (PREP-
                RI) standards and participate in regular program review as defined
                in the RIDE Teacher Preparation Approval Guidelines.
                Notwithstanding language to the contrary within PREP-RI any
                reference to institutions of higher education or colleges and
                universities shall be interpreted to include private service providers
                and other professional organizations for the purposes of this
                section.

          b.    Develop a partnership with one (1) LEA or consortium of LEAs that
                demonstrates a commitment by the LEA(s) to hire and supervise
                candidates as teachers of record while enrolled in an approved
                alternative route to certification program.

          c.    Be designed and delivered in a way that is responsive to needs of
                candidates and LEAs through a measurable system of assessment
                as defined in PREP-RI.

          d.    Private service providers and other professional organizations do
                not require accreditation by NEASC.

     4.   Program Components. The PREP-RI approval process and the standards
          contained therein apply to both traditional and alternative educator
          preparation programs. Alternative certification programs must design
          program components that align to PREP-RI standards and must:

          a.    Ensure that candidates meet eligibility requirements for their
                certificate area prior to entering an approved program. Programs
                may develop conditional acceptance policies for RIDE approval.

          b.    Include rigorous admission criteria that include:

                (1)    A minimum of a bachelor’s degree from an accredited
                       institution; and, for secondary areas, a major in or closely
                       related to the intended teaching field or demonstration of
                       content knowledge by meeting other Council approved
                       content knowledge measures as they are developed and
                       contained in RI certification Regulations;

                (2)    A minimum cumulative grade point average as established
                       by RIDE, consistent with requirements of other educator
                       preparation programs;

                (3)    Other admission criteria identified by the program to meet
                       PREP-RI standards.

          c.    Include the successful completion of an intensive pre-service
                experience of a minimum of five (5) weeks that addresses the
                unique needs of the certificate areas and prepares individuals to
48
                   begin serving as the educator of record including, but not limited to,
                   instruction in grade-level appropriate pedagogy, classroom
                   management, and the Statutes and Regulations governing public
                   education and students’ rights. The pre-service experience must
                   also include opportunities for candidates to apply knowledge and
                   skills.

            d.     Include an ongoing curriculum during the school year through
                   seminars or courses.

            e.     Require individuals working on an Alternative Route Preliminary
                   Certificate to serve as the teacher of record for a minimum of one
                   (1) school year.

            f.     Ensure ongoing professional support and supervision of candidates
                   by educators who model effective practice and assume
                   responsibility for supporting prospective colleagues. Program and
                   district personnel including, but not limited to, a district-assigned
                   mentor, consistent with Council standards for induction and
                   mentoring, must provide field-based support and supervision in
                   such a way that supports the development of prospective
                   educators. Ongoing feedback provided to candidates must focus on
                   improving candidate performance.

      5.    Certification:

            a.     Individuals in alternative route to certification programs will hold an
                   Alternative Route Preliminary Certificate that allows them to serve
                   as the teacher of record for at least one (1) school year.

            b.     Upon successful completion of all program requirements, state
                   testing requirements and recommendation for licensure, individuals
                   will be eligible for a Rhode Island initial educator certificate.

1.8.9 Career and Technical Education Preliminary Certificate

A.    The Career and Technical Education Preliminary Certificate is issued in a
      specific career and technical education area of certification to individuals who
      have demonstrated accomplished practice through an apprenticeship and
      experience in the specific career and technical area and who have passed a
      written and practical exam in the career and technical field, when applicable.

      1.    Total duration of certificate – seven (7) years.

      2.    The Career and Technical Education Preliminary Certificate is valid for
            three (3) years and may be renewed one (1) time for four (4) years.

      3.    Conditions for Issuance:

49
            a.    The applicant holds, at minimum, a high school diploma or a high
                  school equivalency diploma;

            b.    The applicant must have five (5) years of work experience in the
                  career and technical area if the applicant holds high school
                  diploma;

            c.    The applicant must have three (3) years of work experience in the
                  specific career and technical area if the applicant holds an
                  associate's or bachelor's degree in the career and technical area;

            d.    If applicable, the applicant holds a valid occupational
                  license/certification in the career and technical area issued by the
                  appropriate Rhode Island governing body; and

            e.    The employing agency must provide induction support for all new
                  Career and Technical Educators working under this certificate.

            f.    Individuals who hold a valid Rhode Island teacher certificate may
                  meet equivalent occupational experience by meeting RIDE-
                  approved criteria. RIDE will develop criteria for significant
                  occupational experience by January 2026 for Council approval.

      4.    Conditions for Renewal

            a.    The applicant is enrolled in a preparation program prior to renewal
                  and has progressed, at minimum, fifty (50) percent toward
                  completion of the preparation program at the time of renewal;

            b.    The preparation program and the employing agency recommend
                  renewal based on the educator’s performance in the job and
                  progress in the program;

            c.    The applicant has passed a written practical exam in the career and
                  technical area when available and applicable. Applicants who hold
                  advanced industry licenses issued by the appropriate Rhode Island
                  governing body or advanced industry certificates are not required to
                  complete content testing; and

            d.    If a bachelor's degree or work experience was completed more
                  than ten (10) years prior to the date of application, content testing
                  will be required, even if it otherwise would not have been required.

      5.    Certification Areas

            All Secondary Grades Career and Technical Education areas are
            included.

1.8.10 Emergency Preliminary Certificate
50
A.   The Emergency Route Preliminary Certificate is issued at the request of an
     employing agency when the agency documents that it has not been able to find a
     candidate who is certified and qualified for a position that requires certification.
     The Emergency Preliminary Certificate is issued to an individual who has
     adequate content or knowledge of field preparation to fill the position while
     working towards the completion of requirements for full certification.

     1.     Duration

            The Emergency Route Preliminary Certificate is valid for one (1) year.

     2.     Conditions for Issuance

            a.     The applicant for a certificate in a teaching area holds a bachelor’s
                   degree, if applicable, and the applicant for an administrative area
                   (except for School Business Administrator) or a support
                   professional area holds an advanced degree from a regionally
                   accredited institution;

            b.     The applicant for an Emergency Preliminary Certificate in a
                   teaching field has sufficient content knowledge to teach in the field,
                   but has not demonstrated the level of knowledge through the
                   content assessment the applicant for an Emergency Preliminary
                   Certificate in an administrative or support professional field has
                   sufficient knowledge of the field to serve in the assignment but has
                   not demonstrated the level of knowledge through the knowledge of
                   field assessment;

            c.     The employing agency can request an Emergency Preliminary
                   Certificate beginning on July 1 prior to a school year and requests
                   for renewal can be made beginning in June of the following year;

            d.     The employing agency demonstrates that they have advertised the
                   position for a minimum of fourteen (14) days and made efforts to
                   identify and recruit applicants but were unable to find a candidate
                   who is certified and qualified;

            e.     The employing agency must provide induction support for all new
                   educators working under an emergency certificate;

            f.     The certificate is valid only in the requesting agency

     3.     Conditions for Renewal

            a.     For teaching areas, the applicant has completed six (6) credits in
                   the content area of the certificate or has passed the appropriate
                   content assessment. The content assessment and six (6) credits
                   will be required for the second (2nd) renewal.

51
            b.     For administrative and support professional areas, the applicant
                   has passed the knowledge of field test prior to first (1st) renewal.

            c.     The applicant has enrolled in a preparation program if there is an
                   approved Rhode Island program or has developed a credential
                   development plan if there is not an approved Rhode Island program
                   prior to first (1st) renewal.

            d.     The preparation program and the employing agency recommend
                   renewal based on the educator’s performance and progress. If
                   there is no approved Rhode Island preparation program, the
                   applicant must demonstrate progress towards the completion of the
                   plan of study issued by a RIDE-approved Consortium Institution or
                   RIDE.

            e.     The Emergency Route Preliminary Certificate can be renewed up to
                   three (3) times. When appropriate, the educator shall be issued an
                   Expert Residency Preliminary Certificate instead of a renewal of an
                   Emergency Preliminary Certificate.

      4.    Certification Areas

            All teacher, administrator, and support professional areas are included.

      5.    Additional Requirements

            a.     An Emergency Preliminary Certificate can only be issued for the
                   Support Professional Area of Speech Language Pathologist to an
                   individual who holds a bachelor’s degree in communicative
                   disorders from an accredited college or university and has
                   successfully completed no less than eighteen (18) hours of
                   graduate credit in the area of speech language pathology. Districts
                   must assure that the individual is under the direct supervision of a
                   certified speech language pathologist who is supervising no more
                   than one (1) person on an Emergency Certificate.

            b.     Pursuant to R.I. Gen. Laws § 5-39.1-4, an Emergency Preliminary
                   Certificate can only be issued for the Support Professional Area of
                   School Social Worker to an individual who has recently, within
                   eighteen (18) months, completed an approved program and is
                   waiting to take and/or receive the results of the appropriate
                   assessment.

1.8.11 Expert Residency Preliminary Certificate

A.    The Expert Residency Preliminary Certificate is issued to individuals who have a
      bachelor’s degree, demonstrate content proficiency through content
      assessments, and have met other coursework or experience requirements
      specific to individual certification areas.
52
     1.   Duration

          The Expert Residency Preliminary Certificate is valid for two (2) years.

     2.   Conditions for Issuance

          a.    The applicant for a certificate in a teaching area holds a bachelor’s
                degree and the applicant for an administrative area (except for
                School Business Administrator) or for a support professional area
                holds an advanced degree from a regionally accredited institution;

          b.    The applicant has passed all content assessment requirements in
                teaching certification areas;

          c.    The applicant has passed all knowledge of field assessment
                requirements in administrative certification areas; and

          d.    The applicant has provided evidence of meeting any other
                preparation required for specific certification areas as specified in §
                1.8.11(A)(5) of this Part.

     3.   Conditions for Renewal

          a.    The applicant has enrolled in a preparation program, developed a
                credential review plan of study through a RIDE-approved credential
                review consortium institution, or has enrolled in a RIDE-approved
                performance review program, and has demonstrated progression
                evidenced by the completion of a minimum of six (6) credits at the
                time of first (1st) renewal. If the applicant does not hold a major or
                at least nine (9) credits in the content area of the Expert Residency
                Preliminary Certificate, the applicant must complete nine (9)
                content credits in the area of certification prior to (2nd) renewal in
                addition to at least six (6) additional credits toward completion.

          b.    If the applicant is employed at the time of renewal, the employing
                agency must recommend renewal based on the educator’s
                performance in the job.

          c.    The Expert Residency Preliminary Certificate can be renewed for
                two (2) additional years up to two (2) times.

     4.   Certification Areas

          All teacher areas, administrator areas, and support professional
          certification areas are included.

     5.   Additional Requirements



53
     a.   An applicant for an Expert Residency Preliminary Certificate in
          Early Childhood Education or Elementary Education has passed all
          content assessment requirements in the teaching certification area.
          completed seminars or coursework in the pedagogy of reading,
          mathematics, and in teaching differently-abled students.

     b.   An applicant for an Expert Residency Preliminary Certificate in any
          Middle Level Education (independent of an Elementary Education
          or Secondary Grades certificate), Secondary Grades, or All Grades
          subject matter content area has passed all content assessment
          requirements in the teaching certification area.

     c.   An applicant for an Expert Residency Preliminary Certificate in
          Middle Level Education (added on to an Elementary or Secondary
          Education certificate) has passed all content assessment
          requirements in the teaching certification area.

     d.   An applicant for an Expert Residency Preliminary Certificate in
          English to Speakers of Other Languages has met assessment
          requirements for teaching English to Speakers of Other Languages.

     e.   An applicant for an Expert Residency Preliminary Certificate in
          Bilingual and Dual Language Education holds a general education
          certificate for Early Childhood, Elementary Education, Middle
          Grades Education, Secondary Grades Education, or All Grades
          Education and has met assessment requirements for teaching
          English to Speakers of Other Languages and demonstrated
          proficiency in the second (2nd) language of instruction.

     f.   An applicant for an Expert Residency Preliminary Certificate in
          Early Childhood or Elementary Special Education has passed the
          content assessment for the general education certificate or holds a
          valid Early Childhood or Elementary certificate and has met
          assessment requirements for teaching Special Education.

     g.   An applicant for an Expert Residency Preliminary Certificate in
          Special Education-Deaf and Hard of Hearing has met assessment
          requirements for teaching in this field and has met assessment
          requirements in American Sign Language.

     h.   An applicant for an Expert Residency Preliminary Certificate in
          Special Education – Oral/Aural Communication has met
          assessment requirements for teaching in this field.

     i.   An applicant for an Expert Residency Preliminary Certificate in
          Special Education – Severe Intellectual Disability has met
          assessment requirements for teaching in this field.


54
     j.   An applicant for an Expert Residency Preliminary Certificate in
          Special Education – Visually Impaired has met assessment
          requirements for teaching in this field and has demonstrated
          competency in reading and writing Braille.

     k.   An applicant for an Expert Residency Preliminary Certificate in
          Building Level Administrator has met all knowledge of field-testing
          requirements and has three (3) years of educational experience.

     l.   An applicant for an Expert Residency Preliminary Certificate in
          District Level Administrator-Curriculum, Instruction and Assessment
          holds a certificate as a Building Level Administrator and has met all
          knowledge of field-testing requirements.

     m.   An applicant for an Expert Residency Preliminary Certificate in
          District Level Administrator – Special Education has met all
          knowledge of field-testing requirements, and has three (3) years of
          educational experience teaching as a special educator, speech and
          language pathologist, school social worker, or school psychologist.

     n.   An applicant for an Expert Residency Preliminary Certificate in
          District Level Administrator – MLL has met all knowledge of field
          testing requirements, and has three (3) years of educational
          experience teaching as an English to Speakers of Other Languages
          teacher, or working as an MLL Coordinator or an MLL Coach.

     o.   An applicant for an Expert Residency Preliminary Certificate in
          School Business Administrator has at least three (3) years of
          significant experience as a business administrator in a non -
          education context or in school business operations with
          responsibility in at least two (2) of the following five (5) areas:
          financial resource management, human resource management,
          facility management, property acquisition and management, and
          information management or holds a bachelor’s degree in Business
          Administration, Finance, or a related field from a regionally
          accredited institution.

     p.   An applicant for an Expert residency Preliminary Certificate in
          Superintendent of Schools has met all knowledge of field-testing
          requirements and at least three (3) years of significant experience
          as a building administrator or significant leadership in a non -
          educational context.

     q.   An applicant for an Expert Residency Preliminary Certificate in
          Mathematics Specialist/Consultant has met all knowledge of field-
          testing requirements and has three (3) years teaching experience.



55
             r.     An applicant for an Expert Residency Preliminary Certificate in
                    Reading Specialist/Consultant has met all knowledge of field-
                    testing requirements and has three (3) years teaching experience.

1.8.12 International Teacher Preliminary Certificate

A.    The International Teacher Certificate is issued to individuals who hold a valid J-1
      or H-1B Visa and are seeking temporary employment as a full-time teacher of
      record in a Rhode Island PK-12 school. International individuals must
      demonstrate evidence of the equivalent of a United States bachelor’s degree,
      experience requirements, and a completed J-1 or H-1B Visa Agreement with an
      employing agency and a RIDE approved provider. An International Teacher
      Certificate is issued at the request of an employing agency.

      1.     Duration

             The International Teacher Certificate is valid for one (1) year.

      2.     Conditions for Issuance

             a.     The agency and a RIDE-approved international credential provider
                    have a completed J-1 or H-1B Visa Sponsorship Application
                    Agreement;

             b.     An employing agency has offered the international applicant
                    employment;

             c.     The international applicant has completed an international foreign
                    credential review and has demonstrated evidence of:

                    (1)    Conferral of a degree equivalent to a United States
                           bachelor's degree in either Education or the academic
                           subject field in which the individual intends to teach;

                    (2)    Completed program in certification area

             d.    If the individual was prepared at an institution where the language of
                    instruction was not English, then the individual must also meet the
                    English Language Competency testing requirements per § 200-
                    RICR-20-20-2;

             e.     The international applicant has demonstrated sufficient proficiency
                    in the language required for the assignment, when applicable;

             f.     The international applicant meets the requirements to teach in a
                    PK-12 public school within their home country;

             g.     The international applicant has a minimum of two (2) years of
                    teaching experience in the certificate area;

56
             h.     Local education agencies will provide mentoring and common
                    support for international applicants; and

             i.     This certificate is valid only in the requesting local education
                    agency (LEA).

      3.     Conditions for Renewal

             a.     The employing agency recommends renewal based on the
                    international teacher’s performance and progress; and

             b.     The international Teacher Certificate can be renewed up to the
                    length of the approved visa.

1.8.13 Fast-Track Principal Preliminary Certificate

A.    The Fast-track Principal Preliminary Certificate may be issued to individuals who
      meet eligibility requirements pursuant to R.I. Gen. Laws § 16-11-9.

      1.     Duration

             The Fast-track Preliminary Certificate is valid for four (4) years.

      2.     Conditions for Issuance

             a.     The applicant has a minimum of ten (10) years of experience as a
                    teacher rated “effective” or “highly effective”;

             b.     Letter of recommendation from the superintendent(s) of the LEA(s)
                    in which the teacher is employed or was employed in the past;

             c.     The applicant holds a master’s degree or higher;

             d.     The applicant has a record of consistent leadership within the LEA,
                    demonstrated through serving as a facilitator of professional
                    learning, dean, district coach, department chair, or in another
                    leadership position within a school or LEA; and

             e.     The applicant has passed all knowledge of field assessment
                    requirements OR has completed coursework in school finance,
                    school law, and supervision of school personnel.

      3.     Conditions for Progression to PK-12 Building Level Administrator
             Certificate

             a.     A year-long internship in the LEA;

             b.     Lead a district- or schoolwide initiative;

             c.     The coursework or test that was not completed at issuance; and
57
            d.     Completion of a leadership development program if all coursework
                   was not completed at a RIDE-approved program OR coursework in
                   program evaluation, including data analysis, if all coursework was
                   completed at a RIDE-approved program.

1.8.14 Registered Apprenticeship Preliminary Certificate

A.    The Registered Apprenticeship Preliminary Certificate is issued to individuals
      who are currently enrolled in a RIDE-recognized registered apprenticeship
      program and who have been recommended by their employing agency in which
      they are employed.

      1.    Duration

            The Registered Apprenticeship Preliminary Certificate is valid for two (2)
            years.

      2.    Conditions for Issuance

            a.     The applicant is enrolled in a Rhode Island-approved Registered
                   Apprenticeship program;

            b.     The applicant for an administrative area holds a minimum of a
                   bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited institution;

            c.     The employing agency has offered the applicant employment. The
                   registered apprenticeship program and the employing agency
                   jointly request the certificate; and

            d.     The certificate is valid only for the employing agency of the
                   apprenticeship.

      3.    Conditions for Renewal

            a.     The registered apprenticeship program and the employing agency
                   recommend renewal based on the educator’s performance and
                   progress;

            b.     The Registered Apprenticeship Preliminary Certificate can be
                   renewed for one (1) year up to three (3) times.

      4.    Certification Area

            a.     All teacher area certificates and the PK-12 Building Level
                   Administrator certificate are included.

1.8.15 School Nurse Teacher Preliminary Certificate

A.    The School Nurse Teacher Preliminary Certificate is issued to an individual who
      is not eligible for full Rhode Island Certification in the area of School Nurse
58
      Teacher PK-12, but who has met specific criteria that qualify them to serve as
      educators while completing all full certification requirements.

      1.     Duration

            The School Nurse Teacher Preliminary Certificate is valid for four (4)
            years.

      2.     Conditions for Issuance

            a.     The applicant holds a minimum of an associate's degree in nursing
                   from regionally accredited institution ;

            b.     The applicant has completed a program designed for the
                   preparation of professional nurses;

            c.     The applicant holds a Rhode Island Department of Health license
                   as a professional nurse pursuant to R.I. Gen. Law § 5-34-7(1); and

            d.     The applicant has three (3) years of documented experience as a
                   professional nurse.

      3.     Conditions for Renewal

            a.     The applicant has enrolled in an approved program or has a
                   Credential Review Plan of Study from an approved Credential
                   Review Consortium Institution (CRCI);

            b.     The applicant has completed twelve (12) credits of coursework
                   towards an approved program or CRCI Plan of Study; and

            c.     Recommendation from the employing agency for renewal based on
                   educator job performance

            d.     The School Nurse Teacher Preliminary Certificate can be renewed
                   one (1) time for three (3) additional years.

1.8.16 Temporary Initial Educator Preliminary Certificate

A.    A Temporary Initial Educator Preliminary Certificate is issued to an individual who
      has completed an approved educator preparation program in another state or
      who is certified in another state and is seeking certification in Rhode Island
      through reciprocity.

B.    To be awarded the Temporary Initial Educator Preliminary Certificate the
      individual must meet all of the requirements for the Initial Educator Certificate
      except for assessment requirements, including content and knowledge of field
      requirements. If the individual was prepared at an institution where the language


59
     of instruction was not English, then the individual must also meet the English
     Language Competency testing requirements.

     1.    Duration

           The Temporary Initial Educator Preliminary Certificate is valid for one (1)
           year.

     2.    Conditions for Issuance

           a.     RIDE may issue a Temporary Initial Educator Preliminary
                  Certificate if an applicant has completed an approved preparation
                  program or is certified in another state and meets the preparation
                  and eligibility requirements for an Initial Educator Certificate but has
                  neither taken Rhode Island required assessments nor presented
                  evidence of passing scores or has not demonstrated three (3) years
                  of effective teaching experience.

           b.     Once the applicant has met the requirements for the Initial Educator
                  Certificate and submitted evidence of meeting the assessment
                  requirement(s), the certificate will be issued retroactive to the date
                  of the issuance of the Temporary Initial Educator Preliminary
                  Certificate.

           c.     An applicant can only receive a Temporary Initial Educator
                  Preliminary Certificate once.

     3.    Conditions for Renewal

           This certificate is not renewable.

     4.    Certification Areas

           All teacher areas, all administrator areas, and all support professional
           areas are included.

1.8.17 Endorsements

A.   Endorsements acknowledge expanded or specialty area expertise. Some
     endorsement areas, such as Literacy/Dyslexia and Multilingual Learner,
     recognize the attainment of proficiency by an educator. In these areas, educators
     who demonstrate proficiency are able to provide specialized instruction to
     students per R.I. Gen. Laws § 16-11.4-6 and § 200-RICR-20-30-3. RIDE does
     not require specific endorsements for assignment in public schools, but LEAs
     may. Endorsements are not equivalent to teaching certificates and do not qualify
     any individual for an assignment as a teacher-of-record in a public school.
     Renewal requirements do not apply to endorsements. RIDE will designate
     endorsement areas and will publish competencies for the issuance of

60
      endorsements. RIDE will seek approval from the Council prior to the
      implementation of new endorsement areas.

1.8.18 Special Provisional Certificate

A.    The Special Provisional Certificate may be issued to any certified educator
      holding an Initial, Professional, or Advanced Educator Certificate who has not
      met the required professional learning units.

      1.     Duration

             The Special Provisional Certificate is valid for one (1) year and is non-
             renewable.

      2.     Conditions for Issuance

             a.     The Special Provisional Certificate may be issued to an educator
                    holding an Initial, Professional, or Advanced Educator Certificate
                    when professional learning units (PLUs) required for renewal have
                    not been met.

             b.     The Special Provisional Certificate may only be issued once in an
                    educator's career in Rhode Island.

      3.     Conditions for Renewal

             a.     The Special Provisional Certificate is not renewable.

             b.     Upon submission of required professional learning units at the
                    expiration of the Special Provisional Certificate, the remaining time
                    will be issued on the educator's full certificate(s). Failure to submit
                    required professional learning units will result in the expiration of all
                    certificates.

1.9   Teacher Certificate Areas
A.    Teacher certification is offered in content areas and for limited grade ranges that
      qualify the teacher for specific assignments in Rhode Island Public Schools.
      Certification in most teaching areas requires: a bachelor’s degree; completion of
      an approved teacher preparation program that assures completers demonstrate
      pedagogical competencies of the Rhode Island Professional Teaching Standards
      (RIPTS) and content competencies prescribed by the appropriate professional
      association; field experience that in cludes a minimum of one (1) year practical
      residency or equivalent clinical time for the first (1st) certification area and other
      field requirements for the certification area; a minimum of sixty (60) hours of field
      experience prior to or following the practical residency and passing scores on
      content testing required for the certification area.


61
B.    A certified teacher may be employed for a maximum of twenty percent (20%) of
      their time in a teacher certificate area and/or at a grade level for which they do
      not hold a certificate, provided there is evidence of competence in the content
      and the Superintendent and teacher mutually agree to the assignment.
      Superintendents must obtain a waiver from the Commissioner and notify the local
      educator union prior to requesting the waiver. Waivers will not be approved if the
      Commissioner finds the LEA is attempting to use this flexibility to avoid filling full-
      time positions.

1.9.1 Early Childhood Teacher Certificates

A.    Early Childhood Education Teacher, Grades PK-3

      1.     Validity of Certificate:

             This certificate is valid for assignment as an Early Childhood Education
             Teacher in Grades PK-3 in Rhode Island Public Schools.

      2.     Requirements:

             a.     Option One:

                    (1)     Has completed an approved program in this certification
                            area;

                    (2)     Hold’s a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited
                            institution;

                    (3)    Has completed a minimum of one (1) year practical
                           residency or the equivalent in this certification area and a
                           minimum of sixty (60) hours field experience prior to or
                           following residency;

                    (4)    Has demonstrated the pedagogical competencies of the
                           Rhode Island Professional Teaching Standards (RIPTS);

                    (5)    Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies
                           prescribed by the appropriate, RIDE-approved national
                           professional association;

                    (6)     Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable
                            student standards and proficiency in designing and
                            implementing standards-based instruction and assessment;
                            and

                    (7)     Has met all content testing requirements for this certification
                            area.

             b.     Option Two:

62
                  (1)     Educators who hold a valid Rhode Island Elementary
                          Teacher, grades K-6 certificate and have a minimum of four
                          (4) years successful teaching experience in Rhode Island
                          are eligible for an Early Childhood Teacher, grades PK-3
                          certificate with evidence of meeting all content testing
                          requirements for this certification area.

           c.     Option Three:

                  (1)     Educators who hold a valid Rhode Island All Grades
                          Education Teacher, grades PK-12 certificate and have a
                          minimum of four (4) years successful teaching experience in
                          grades PK-3 are eligible for an Early Childhood Teacher,
                          grades PK-3 certificate with evidence of meeting all content
                          testing requirements for this certification area and
                          completion of twelve (12) credits in early childhood
                          education to include the teaching of: English Language Arts,
                          Mathematics, Early Childhood Development, and Early
                          Childhood Special Education.

B.   Early Childhood Special Education Teacher, Birth to Grade 3

     1.    Validity of Certificate:

           a.     This certificate is valid for assignment as an Early Childhood
                  Special Education Teacher from Birth to Grade Three (3) in Rhode
                  Island Public Schools.

           b.     Teachers who hold only Special Education certification may work in
                  self-contained settings or may provide services directly to students
                  in general education or other settings.

     2.    Requirements:

           a.     Holds certification in Early Childhood Education or has passed the
                  approved content assessment for early childhood education;

           b.     Has completed an approved program in this certification area;

           c.     Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited institution;

           d.     Has completed a minimum of one (1) year of practical residency or
                  the equivalent in this area and a minimum of sixty (60) hours field
                  experience prior to or following residency;

           e.     Has demonstrated the pedagogical competencies of the Rhode
                  Island Professional Teaching Standards (RIPTS);



63
           f.     Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies as
                  prescribed by the appropriate and RIDE-approved national
                  professional associations;

           g.     Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable student
                  standards and proficiency in designing and implementing
                  standards-based instruction and assessment; and

           h.     Has met all content testing requirements for this certification area.

C.   Early Childhood MLL Integrated Content Teacher, Grades PK-3

     1.    Validity of Certificate:

           This certificate is valid for assignment as an Early Childhood MLL
           Integrated Content Teacher in Grades PK-3 in Rhode Island Public
           Schools.

     2.    Requirements:

           This certificate can be added to extend an Early Childhood Education
           Teacher Certificate or an Early Childhood Special Education Teacher
           Certificate

           a.     Holds a certification in Early Childhood Education or Early
                  Childhood Special Education;

           b.     Has completed coursework in the following: Second Language
                  Acquisition Theory and Practice; Linguistics and the Structure of
                  English for Language Teaching; Socio-Cultural Studies in Teaching
                  Diverse Learners; Foundations of MLL Content-Based Instruction
                  and Assessment, including instructional technology; an d
                  Introduction to Content-Based Oracy and Literacy Development for
                  Multilingual Learners;

           c.     Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited institution;

           d.     Has completed a minimum of forty-five (45) hours of practicum in
                  this area;

           e.     Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies as
                  prescribed by the appropriate RIDE-approved national professional
                  associations;

           f.     Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable student
                  standards and proficiency in designing and implementing
                  standards-based instruction and assessment;

           g.     Has met all content testing requirements for this certification area.

64
D.    Early Childhood Bilingual and Dual Language Education Teacher, Grades PK-3

      1.    Validity of Certificate:

            This certificate is valid for assignment as an Early Childhood Bilingual and
            Dual Language Education Teacher in Grades PK-3 in Rhode Island Public
            Schools.

      2.    Requirements:

            a.     Holds certification in Early Childhood Education;

            b.     Has completed an approved program in this certification area;

            c.     Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited institution;

            d.     Has completed a minimum of forty-five (45) hours of practicum in
                   this area;

            e.     Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies as
                   prescribed by the appropriate and RIDE-approved national
                   professional associations;

            f.     Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable student
                   standards and proficiency in designing and implementing
                   standards-based instruction and assessment;

            g.     Has met all content testing requirements for this certification area;
                   and

            h.     Has demonstrated proficiency in the first (1st) and second (2nd)
                   languages of instruction.

      3.    Individuals who hold this certificate may obtain English to Speakers of
            Other Languages certification by demonstrating English proficiency and
            completing coursework in First and Second Language Acquisition, English
            Linguistics and Curriculum, and Assessment and Methods for English
            Learners.

      4.    The Council will review this pathway every five (5) years for continuing
            approval.

1.9.2 Elementary Teacher Certificates

A.    Elementary Education Teacher, Grades K-6

      1.    Validity of Certificate:



65
          This certificate is valid for assignment as an Elementary Education
          Teacher in Grades Kindergarten to Six (K to 6) in Rhode Island Public
          Schools.

     2.   Requirements:

          a.    Option One:

                (1)    Has completed an approved program in this certification
                       area;

                (2)    Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited
                       institution;

                (3)    Has completed a minimum of one (1) year of practical
                       residency or the equivalent in this area and a minimum of
                       sixty (60) hours field experience prior to or following
                       residency;

                (4)    Has demonstrated the pedagogical competencies of the
                       Rhode Island Professional Teaching Standards (RIPTS);

                (5)    Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies
                       as prescribed by the appropriate and RIDE-approved
                       national professional associations;

                (6)    Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable
                       student standards and proficiency in designing and
                       implementing standards-based instruction and assessment;
                       and

                (7)    Has met all content testing requirements for this certification
                       area.

          b.    Option Two:

                (1)    Educators who hold a valid Rhode Island Early Childhood
                       Teacher, grades PK-3 certificate with a minimum of four (4)
                       successful teaching experience in Rhode Island are eligible
                       for an Elementary Teacher, grades K-6 certificate with
                       evidence of meeting all content testing requirements for this
                       certification area.

          c.    Option Three:

                (1)    Educators who hold a valid Rhode Island Middle Grades
                       Teacher, grades 5-8 certificate with a minimum of four (4)
                       years successful teaching experience in grades 5 and 6 in
                       Rhode Island are eligible for an Elementary Teacher, grades
66
                          K-6 certificate with evidence of meeting all content testing
                          requirements for this certification area.

           d.     Option Four:

                  (1)     Educators who hold a valid Rhode Island All Grades
                          Teacher, grades PK-12 certificate with a minimum of four (4)
                          successful teaching experience grades K through 6 in Rhode
                          Island are eligible for an Elementary Teacher, grades K-6
                          certificate with evidence of meeting all content testing
                          requirements for this certification area and the completion of
                          twelve (12) credits in the teaching of: English Language Arts,
                          Mathematics, Science, and Social Studies.

B.   Elementary Special Education Teacher, Grades K-8

     1.    Validity of Certificate:

           a.     This certificate is valid for assignment as an Elementary Special
                  Education Teacher in Grades Kindergarten to Eight (K to 8) in
                  Rhode Island Public Schools.

           b.     Teachers who hold only Special Education certification may work in
                  self-contained settings or may provide services directly to students
                  in general education or other settings.

     2.    Requirements:

           a.     Holds certification in Elementary Education or has passed the
                  approved content assessment for elementary education; Holds
                  certification in Elementary Education or has passed the approved
                  content assessment for elementary education;

           b.     Has completed an approved program in this certification area;

           c.     Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited institution;

           d.     Has completed a minimum of one (1) year of practical residency or
                  the equivalent in this area and a minimum of sixty (60) hours field
                  experience prior to or following residency;

           e.     Has completed coursework in English Language Arts, Reading,
                  Mathematics, Social Studies, and Science content and methods.

           f.     Has demonstrated the pedagogical competencies of the Rhode
                  Island Professional Teaching Standards (RIPTS);




67
           g.     Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies as
                  prescribed by the appropriate and RIDE-approved national
                  professional associations;

           h.     Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable student
                  standards and proficiency in designing and implementing
                  standards-based instruction and assessment; and

           i.     Has met all content testing requirements for this certification area.

C.   Elementary MLL Integrated Content Teacher, Grades K-6

     1.    Validity of Certificate:

           This certificate is valid for assignment as an Elementary MLL Integrated
           Content Teacher in Grades K-6 in Rhode Island Public Schools.

     2.    Requirements:

           This certificate can be added to extend an Elementary Education Teacher
           Certificate or an Elementary Special Education Teacher Certificate

           a.     Holds a certificate in Elementary Education or Elementary Special
                  Education;

           b.     Has completed coursework in the following: Second Language
                  Acquisition Theory and Practice; Linguistics and the Structure of
                  English for Language Teaching; Socio-Cultural Studies in Teaching
                  Diverse Learners; Foundations of MLL Content-Based Instruction
                  and Assessment, including instructional technology; and
                  Introduction to Content-Based Oracy and Literacy Development for
                  Multilingual Learners;

           c.     Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited institution;

           d.     Has completed a minimum of forty-five (45) hours of practicum in
                  this area;

           e.     Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies as
                  prescribed by the appropriate and RIDE-approved national
                  professional associations;

           f.     Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable student
                  standards and proficiency in designing and implementing
                  standards-based instruction and assessment; and

           g.     Has met all content testing requirements for this certification area;

D.   Elementary Bilingual and Dual Language Education Teacher, Grades K-6

68
      1.    Validity of Certificate:

            This certificate is valid for assignment as an Elementary Bilingual and
            Dual Language Education Teacher in Grades Kindergarten to Six (K to 6)
            in Rhode Island Public Schools.

      2.    Requirements:

            a.     Holds certification in Elementary Education;

            b.     Has completed an approved program in this certification area;

            c.     Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited institution;

            d.     Has completed a minimum of forty-five (45) hours of practicum in
                   this area;

            e.     Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies as
                   prescribed by the appropriate and RIDE-approved national
                   professional associations;

            f.     Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable student
                   standards and proficiency in designing and implementing
                   standards-based instruction and assessment;

            g.     Has met all content testing requirements for this certification area;
                   and

            h.     Has demonstrated proficiency in the first (1st) and second (2nd)
                   language of instruction.

      3.    Individuals who hold this certificate may obtain English to Speakers of
            Other Languages certification by demonstrating English proficiency and
            completing coursework in First and Second Language Acquisition, English
            Linguistics and Curriculum, and Assessment and Methods for English
            Learners.

      4.    The Council will review this pathway every five (5) years for continuing
            approval.

1.9.3 Middle Grades Teacher Certificates

A.    Educators can attain Middle Grades Certification in the following eight (8) ways:

      1.    Option One: Earn a Middle Grades English, Mathematics, Science, or
            Social Studies Certificate, independent of any other certificate;

      2.    Option Two: Extend an Elementary Education Teacher Certificate; or


69
     3.    Option Three: Extend a Secondary Grades Biology, Chemistry, English,
           General Science, Mathematics, Physics or Social Studies Certificate; or

     4.    Option Four: Earn a Middle Grades English, Mathematics, Science, or
           Social Studies certificate by holding a current Rhode Island Middle Grades
           Teacher, grades 5-8 certificate, have four (4) years successful teaching
           experience in Rhode Island, and evidence of meeting all content testing
           requirements for the certification area; or

     5.    Option Five: Earn a Middle Grades English, Mathematics, Science, or
           Social Studies certificate by holding a current Rhode Island Elementary
           Teacher, grades K-6 certificate, have four (4) years successful teaching
           experience in grades 5 or 6 in Rhode Island, and evidence of meeting all
           content testing requirements for the certification area; or

     6.    Option Six: Earn a Middle Grades English, Mathematics, Science, or
           Social Studies certificate by holding a current Rhode Island Secondary
           Teacher, grades 6-12 certificate, have four (4) years successful teaching
           experience in Rhode Island, and evidence of meeting all content testing
           requirements for the certification area; or

     7.    Option Seven: Earn a Middle Grades English, Mathematics, Science, or
           Social Studies certificate by holding a current Rhode Island All Grades
           Teacher, grades PK-12 certificate, have four (4) years successful teaching
           experience in grades 5 through 8 in Rhode Island, evidence of meeting all
           content testing requirements for the certification area.

B.   Middle Grades English Teacher, Grades 5-8

     1.    Validity of Certificate:

           This certificate is valid for assignment as a Middle Grades English
           Teacher in Grades Five to Eight (5 to 8) in Rhode Island Public Schools.

     2.    Requirements:

           a.     Option One: Middle Grades English Teacher Certification

                  (1)     Has completed an approved program in this certification
                          area;

                  (2)     Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited
                          institution;

                  (3)     Has completed a minimum of one (1) year of practical
                          residency or the equivalent in this area and a minimum of
                          sixty (60) hours field experience prior to or following
                          residency;

70
          (4)   Has demonstrated the pedagogical competencies of the
                Rhode Island Professional Teaching Standards (RIPTS);

          (5)   Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies
                as prescribed by the RIDE-approved national professional
                associations;

          (6)   Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable
                student standards and proficiency in designing and
                implementing standards-based instruction and assessment;
                and

          (7)   Has met all content testing requirements for this certification
                area.

     b.   Option Two: Middle Grades English Teacher Certification as an
          extension of an Elementary Education Certificate

          (1)   Has completed an approved program in this certification
                area;

          (2)   Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited
                institution;

          (3)   Holds certification in Elementary Education;

          (4)   Has completed a minimum of forty-five (45) hours of
                practicum in this certification area;

          (5)   Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies
                as prescribed by the RIDE-approved national professional
                association;

          (6)   Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable
                student standards and proficiency in designing and
                implementing standards-based instruction and assessment;
                and

          (7)   Has met all content testing requirements for this certification
                area.

     c.   Option Three: Middle Grades English Teacher Certification as an
          extension of a Secondary Grades English Teacher

          (1)   Has completed an approved program in this certification
                area;

          (2)   Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited
                institution;

71
          (3)   Holds certification in Secondary Grades English;

          (4)   Has completed a minimum of forty-five (45) hours of
                practicum in this certification area;

          (5)    Has demonstrated the content and pedagogical
                competencies as prescribed by the RIDE-approved national
                professional association; and

          (6)   Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable
                student standards and proficiency in designing and
                implementing standards-based instruction and assessment.

     d.   Option Four: Adding an additional certificate: Middle (Mathematics,
          Science, Social Studies)

          (1)   Holds a current Rhode Island Middle Grades Teacher,
                grades 5-8 certificate; and

          (2)   Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                Rhode Island; and

          (3)   Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                certification area.

     e.   Option Five: Adding an additional certificate: Elementary

          (1)   Holds a current Rhode Island Elementary Teacher, grades
                K-6 certificate;

          (2)   Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                grades 5 or 6 in Rhode Island;

          (3)   Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                certification area.

     f.   Option Six: Adding an additional certificate: Secondary

          (1)   Holds a current Rhode Island Secondary Teacher, grades 6-
                12 certificate;

          (2)   Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                Rhode Island;

          (3)   Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                certification area.

     g.   Option Seven: Adding an additional certificate: All Grades


72
                  (1)     Holds a current Rhode Island All Grades Teacher, grades
                          PK-12 certificate;

                  (2)     Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                          grades 5 through 8 in Rhode Island;

                  (3)     Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                          certification area.

C.   Middle Grades Mathematics Teacher, Grades 5-8

     1.    Validity of Certificate:

           This certificate is valid for assignment as a Middle Grades Mathematics
           Teacher in Grades Five to Eight (5 to 8) in Rhode Island Public Schools.

     2.    Requirements:

           a.     Option One: Middle Grades Mathematics Teacher Certification

                  (1)     Has completed an approved program in this certification
                          area;

                  (2)     Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited
                          institution;

                  (3)     Has completed a minimum of one (1) year of practical
                          residency or the equivalent in this area and a minimum of
                          sixty (60) hours field experience prior to or following
                          residency;

                  (4)     Has demonstrated the pedagogical competencies of the
                          Rhode Island Professional Teaching Standards (RIPTS);

                  (5)     Has demonstrated pedagogical and content competencies
                          as prescribed by the RIDE-approved national professional
                          association;

                  (6)     Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable
                          student standards and proficiency in designing and
                          implementing standards-based instruction and assessment;
                          and

                  (7)     Has met all content testing requirements for this certification
                          area.

           b.     Option Two: Middle Grades Mathematics Teacher Certification as
                  an extension of an Elementary Education Certificate


73
          (1)   Has completed an approved program in this certification
                area;

          (2)   Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited
                institution;

          (3)   Holds certification in Elementary Education;

          (4)   Has completed a minimum of forty-five (45) hours of
                practicum in this certification area;

          (5)   Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies
                as prescribed by the RIDE-approved national professional
                association;

          (6)   Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable
                student standards and proficiency in designing and
                implementing standards-based instruction and assessment;
                and

          (7)   Has met all content testing requirements for this certification
                area.

     c.   Option Three: Middle Grades Mathematics Teacher Certification as
          an extension of a Secondary Grades Mathematics Teacher

          (1)   Has completed an approved program in this certification
                area;

          (2)   Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited
                institution;

          (3)   Holds certification in Secondary Grades Mathematics;

          (4)   Has completed a minimum of forty-five (45) hours of
                practicum in this certification area;

          (5)   Has demonstrated the content and pedagogical
                competencies as prescribed by the RIDE-approved national
                professional association; and

          (6)   Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable
                student standards and proficiency in designing and
                implementing standards-based instruction and assessment.

     d.   Option Four: Adding an additional certificate: Middle (English,
          Science, Social Studies)



74
                  (1)     Holds a current Rhode Island Middle Grades Teacher,
                          grades 5-8 certificate; and

                  (2)     Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                          Rhode Island; and

                  (3)     Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                          certification area.

           e.     Option Five: Adding an additional certificate: Elementary

                  (1)     Holds a current Rhode Island Elementary Teacher, grades
                          K-6 certificate;

                  (2)     Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                          grades 5 or 6 in Rhode Island;

                  (3)     Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                          certification area.

           f.     Option Six: Adding an additional certificate: Secondary

                  (1)     Holds a current Rhode Island Secondary Teacher, grades 6-
                          12 certificate;

                  (2)     Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                          Rhode Island;

                  (3)     Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                          certification area.

           g.     Option Seven: Adding an additional certificate: All Grades

                  (1)     Holds a current Rhode Island All Grades Teacher, grades
                          PK-12 certificate;

                  (2)     Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience grades
                          5 through 8 in in Rhode Island;

                  (3)     Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                          certification area.

D.   Middle Grades Science Teacher, Grades 5-8

     1.    Validity of Certificate:

           This certificate is valid for assignment as a Middle Grades Science
           Teacher in Grades Five to Eight (5 to 8) in Rhode Island Public Schools.

     2.    Requirements:
75
     a.   Option One: Middle Grades Science Teacher Certification

          (1)   Has completed an approved program in this certification
                area;

          (2)   Holds a bachelor’s degree from regionally accredited
                institution;

          (3)   Has completed a minimum of one (1) year of practical
                residency or the equivalent in this area and a minimum of
                sixty (60) hours field experience prior to and following
                residency;

          (4)   Has demonstrated the pedagogical competencies of the
                Rhode Island Professional Teaching Standards (RIPTS);

          (5)   Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies
                as prescribed by the RIDE-approved national professional
                associations;

          (6)   Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable
                student standards and proficiency in designing and
                implementing standards-based instruction and assessment;
                and

          (7)   Has met all content testing requirements for this certification
                area.

     b.   Option Two: Middle Grades Science Teacher Certification as an
          extension of an Elementary Education Certificate

          (1)   Has completed an approved program in this certification
                area;

          (2)   Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited
                institution;

          (3)   Holds certification in Elementary Education;

          (4)   Has completed a minimum of forty-five (45) hours of
                practicum in this certification area;

          (5)   Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies
                as prescribed by the RIDE-approved national professional
                associations;

          (6)   Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable
                student standards and proficiency in designing and


76
                implementing standards-based instruction and assessment;
                and

          (7)   Has met all content testing requirements for this certification
                area.

     c.   Option Three: Middle Grades Science Teacher Certification as an
          extension of a Secondary Grades Biology, Chemistry, General
          Science, or Physics Teacher

          (1)   Has completed an approved program in this certification
                area;

          (2)   Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited
                institution;

          (3)   Holds certification in Secondary Grades Biology, Chemistry,
                General Science, or Physics;

          (4)   Has completed a minimum of forty-five (45) hours of
                practicum in this certification area; and

          (5)   Has demonstrated the content and pedagogical
                competencies as prescribed by the RIDE-approved national
                professional associations; and

          (6)   Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable
                student standards and proficiency in designing and
                implementing standards-based instruction and assessment.

     d.   Option Four: Adding an additional certificate: Middle (Mathematics,
          English, Social Studies)

          (1)   Holds a current Rhode Island Middle Grades Teacher,
                grades 5-8 certificate;

          (2)   Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                Rhode Island; and

          (3)   Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                certification area.

     e.   Option Five: Adding an additional certificate: Elementary

          (1)   Holds a current Rhode Island Elementary Teacher, grades
                K-6 certificate;

          (2)   Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                grades 5 or 6 in Rhode Island;

77
                  (3)     Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                          certification area.

           f.     Option Six: Adding an additional certificate: Secondary

                  (1)     Holds a current Rhode Island Secondary Teacher, grades 6-
                          12 certificate;

                  (2)     Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                          Rhode Island;

                  (3)     Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                          certification area.

           g.     Option Seven: Adding an additional certificate: All Grades

                  (1)     Holds a current Rhode Island All Grades Teacher, grades
                          PK-12 certificate;

                  (2)     Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                          grades 5 through 8 in Rhode Island;

                  (3)     Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                          certification area.

E.   Middle Grades Social Studies Teacher, Grades 5-8

     1.    Validity of Certificate:

           This certificate is valid for assignment as a Middle Grades Social Studies
           Teacher in Grades Five to Eight (5 to 8) in Rhode Island Public Schools.

     2.    Requirements:

           a.     Option One: Middle Grades Social Studies Teacher Certification

                  (1)     Has completed an approved program in this certification
                          area;

                  (2)     Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited
                          institution;

                  (3)     Has completed a minimum of one (1) year of practical
                          residency or the equivalent in this area and a minimum of
                          sixty (60) hours field experience prior to or following
                          residency;

                  (4)     Has demonstrated the pedagogical competencies of the
                          Rhode Island Professional Teaching Standards (RIPTS);

78
          (5)   Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies
                as prescribed by the RIDE-approved national professional
                association;

          (6)   Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable
                student standards and proficiency in designing and
                implementing standards-based instruction and assessment;
                and

          (7)   Has met all content testing requirements for this certification
                area.

     b.   Option Two: Middle Grades Social Studies Teacher Certification as
          an extension of an Elementary Education Certificate

          (1)   Has completed an approved program in this certification
                area;

          (2)   Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited
                institution

          (3)   Holds certification in Elementary Education;

          (4)   Has completed a minimum of forty-five (45) hours of
                practicum in this certification area;

          (5)   Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies
                as prescribed by the RIDE-approved national professional
                association;

          (6)   Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable
                student standards and proficiency in designing and
                implementing standards-based instruction and assessment;
                and

          (7)   Has met all content testing requirements for this certification
                area.

     c.   Option Three: Middle Grades Social Studies Certification as an
          extension of a Secondary Grades Social Studies Teacher

          (1)   Has completed an approved program in this certification
                area;

          (2)   Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited
                institution;

          (3)   Holds certification in Secondary Grades Social Studies;


79
          (4)   Has completed a minimum of forty-five (45) hours of
                practicum in this certification area; and

          (5)   Has demonstrated the content and pedagogical
                competencies as prescribed by the RIDE-approved national
                association; and

          (6)   Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable
                student standards and proficiency in designing and
                implementing standards-based instruction and assessment.

     d.   Option Four: Adding an additional certificate: Middle (Mathematics,
          English, Science)

          (1)   Holds a current Rhode Island Middle Grades Teacher,
                grades 5-8 certificate;

          (2)   Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                Rhode Island; and

          (3)   Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                certification area.

     e.   Option Five: Adding an additional certificate: Elementary

          (1)   Holds a current Rhode Island Elementary Teacher, grades
                K-6 certificate;

          (2)   Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                grades 5 or 6 in Rhode Island;

          (3)   Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                certification area.

     f.   Option Six: Adding an additional certificate: Secondary

          (1)   Holds a current Rhode Island Secondary Teacher, grades 6-
                12 certificate;

          (2)   Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                Rhode Island;

          (3)   Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                certification area.

     g.   Option Seven: Adding an additional certificate: All Grades

          (1)   Holds a current Rhode Island All Grades Teacher, grades
                PK-12 certificate;

80
                  (2)     Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                          grades 5 through 8 in Rhode Island;

                  (3)     Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                          certification area.

F.   Middle Grades Special Education Teacher, Grades 5-8

     1.    Validity of Certificate:

           a.     This certificate is valid for assignment as a Middle Grades Special
                  Education Teacher in Grades Five to Eight (5 to 8) in Rhode Island
                  Public Schools.

                  (1)     Educators who hold certification in Elementary Education,
                          Elementary Special Education, and Middle Grades
                          Education in a content field are also eligible for assignment
                          as a Middle Grades Special Education Teacher in Grades
                          Five to Eight (5 to 8) in Rhode Island Public Schools without
                          adding the specific Middle Grades Special Education
                          Teacher Grades Five to Eight (5 to 8) certification area.

                  (2)     Educators who hold certification in Secondary Grades in a
                          content field, Secondary Special Education, and Middle
                          Grades Education in a content field are also eligible for
                          assignment as a Middle Grades Special Education Teacher
                          in Grades Five to Eight (5 to 8) in Rhode Island Public
                          Schools without adding the specific Middle Grades Special
                          Education Teacher Grades Five to Eight (5 to 8) certification
                          area.

           b.     Teachers who hold only Special Education certification may work in
                  self-contained settings in the content area(s) in which they are able
                  to demonstrate competency as determined by the local education
                  agency or may provide services directly to students in general
                  education or other settings in any content area.

     2.    Requirements

           a.     Has completed an approved program in Special Education;

           b.     Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited institution;

           c.     Has completed a minimum of one (1) year of practical residency or
                  the equivalent in this area and a minimum of sixty (60) hours field
                  experience prior to or following residency;

           d.     Has demonstrated the pedagogical competencies of the Rhode
                  Island Professional Teaching Standards (RIPTS);
81
           e.     Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies as
                  prescribed by the RIDE-approved national professional association;

           f.     Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable student
                  standards and proficiency in designing and implementing
                  standards-based instruction and assessment; and

           g.     Has met all content testing requirements for this certification area.

G.   Middle Grades MLL Integrated Content Teacher, Grades 5-8

     1.    Validity of Certificate:

           This certificate is valid for assignment as a Middle Grades MLL Integrated
           Content Teacher in Grades 5-8 in Rhode Island Public Schools.

           a.     Educators who hold certification in Elementary Education,
                  Elementary MLL Integrated Content, and Middle Grades Education
                  in a content field are also eligible for assignment as a Middle
                  Grades MLL Integrated Content Teacher in Grades Five to Eight (5
                  to 8) in Rhode Island Public Schools without adding the specific
                  Middle Grades MLL Integrated Content Teacher Grades Five to
                  Eight (5 to 8) certification area.

           b.     Educators who hold certification in Secondary Grades Education in
                  a content field, Secondary Grades MLL Integrated Content, and
                  Middle Grades Education in a content field are also eligible for
                  assignment as a Middle Grades MLL Integrated Content Teacher
                  Grades Five to Eight (5 to 8) in Rhode Island Public Schools
                  without adding the specific Middle Grades MLL Integrated Content
                  Teacher Grades Five to Eight (5 to 8) certification area.

     2.    Requirements:

           This certificate can be added to extend a Middle Grades Education
           Teacher Certificate or a Middle Grades Special Education Teacher
           Certificate

           a.     Holds a certificate in Middle Grades Education or Middle Grades
                  Special Education;

           b.     Has completed coursework in the following: Second Language
                  Acquisition Theory and Practice; Linguistics and the Structure of
                  English for Language Teaching; Socio-Cultural Studies in Teaching
                  Diverse Learners; Foundations of MLL Content-Based Instruction
                  and Assessment, including instructional technology; and
                  Introduction to Content-Based Oracy and Literacy Development for
                  Multilingual Learners;

82
           c.     Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited institution;

           d.     Has completed a minimum of forty-five (45) hours of practicum in
                  this area;

           e.     Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies as
                  prescribed by the RIDE-approved
                  national professional association;

           f.     Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable student
                  standards and proficiency in designing and implementing
                  standards-based instruction and assessment;

           g.     Has met all content testing requirements for this certification area.

H.   Middle Grades Bilingual and Dual Language Education Teacher, Grades 5-8

     1.    Validity of Certificate:

           a.     This certificate is valid for assignment as a Middle Grades Bilingual
                  and Dual Language Education Teacher in Grades Five to Eight (5
                  to 8) in Rhode Island Public Schools.

                  (1)     Educators who hold certification in Elementary Education,
                          Elementary Bilingual and Dual Language Education, and
                          Middle Grades Education in a content field are also eligible
                          for assignment as a Middle Grades Bilingual and Dual
                          Language Education Teacher in Grades Five to Eight (5 to
                          8) in Rhode Island Public Schools without adding the specific
                          Middle Grades Bilingual and Dual Language Education
                          Teacher Grades Five to Eight (5 to 8) certification area.

                  (2)     Educators who hold certification in Secondary Grades
                          certification in a content field, Secondary Bilingual and Dual
                          Language Education, and Middle Grades Education in a
                          content field are also eligible for assignment as a Middle
                          Grades Bilingual and Dual Language Education Teacher in
                          Grades Five to Eight (5 to 8) in Rhode Island Public Schools
                          without adding the specific Middle Grades Bilingual and Dual
                          Language Education Teacher Grades Five to Eight (5 to 8)
                          certification area.

     2.    Requirements:

           a.     Holds certification in Middle Grades English, Mathematics, Science,
                  or Social Studies;

           b.     Has completed an approved program in this certification area;

83
           c.     Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited institution;

           d.     Has completed a minimum of forty-five (45) hours of practicum in
                  this area;

           e.     Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies as
                  prescribed by the RIDE-approved national professional association;

           f.     Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable student
                  standards and proficiency in designing and implementing
                  standards-based instruction and assessment;

           g.     Has met all content testing requirements for this certification area;
                  and

           h.     Has demonstrated proficiency in the first (1st) and second (2nd)
                  language of instruction.

           i.     Individuals who hold this certificate may obtain English to Speakers
                  of Other Languages certification by demonstrating English
                  proficiency and completing coursework in First and Second
                  Language Acquisition, English Linguistics and Curriculum, and
                  Assessment and Methods for English Learners. The Council will
                  review this pathway every five (5) years for continuing approval.

1.9.4 Secondary Grades Teacher Certificates

A.   Secondary Grades Agriculture Teacher, Grades 6-12

     1.    Validity of Certificate:

           a.     This certificate is valid for assignment as a Secondary Grades
                  Agriculture Teacher in Grades Six to Twelve (6 to 12) in Rhode
                  Island Public Schools.

     2.    Requirements:

           a.     Option One: Approved Program

                  (1)     Has completed an approved program in this certification
                          area;

                  (2)     Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited
                          institution;

                  (3)     Has completed a major or the equivalent in Agriculture or a
                          closely related field;

                  (4)     Has completed a minimum of one (1) year of practical
                          residency or the equivalent in this area and a minimum of
84
                sixty (60) hours field experience prior to or following
                residency;

          (5)   Has demonstrated the pedagogical competencies of the
                Rhode Island Professional Teaching Standards (RIPTS);

          (6)   Has demonstrated the content and pedagogical
                competencies as prescribed by the RIDE-approved national
                professional association;

          (7)   Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable
                student standards and proficiency in designing and
                implementing standards-based instruction and assessment;
                and

          (8)   Has met all content testing requirements for this certification
                area.

     b.   Option Two: Adding an additional certificate: Secondary

          (1)   Holds a current Rhode Island Secondary Teacher, grades 6-
                12 certificate;

          (2)   Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                Rhode Island; and

          (3)   Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                certification area.

     c.   Option Three: Adding an additional certificate: Middle Grades

          (1)   Holds a current Rhode Island Middle Grades Teacher,
                grades 5-8 certificate;

          (2)   Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                Rhode Island;

          (3)   Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                certification area; and

     d.   Option Four: Adding an additional certificate: All Grades

          (1)   Holds a current Rhode Island All Grades Teacher, grades
                PK-12 certificate;

          (2)   Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                grades 6 through 12 in Rhode Island;

          (3)   Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                certification area.
85
B.   Secondary Grades Biology Teacher, Grades 6-12

     1.    Validity of Certificate:

           a.     This certificate is valid for assignment as a Secondary Grades
                  Biology Teacher in Grades Six to Twelve (6 to 12) in Rhode Island
                  Public Schools.

     2.    Requirements:

           a.     Option One: Approved Program

                  (1)     Has completed an approved program in this certification
                          area;

                  (2)     Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited
                          institution;

                  (3)     Has completed a major or the equivalent in Biology or a
                          closely related field;

                  (4)     Has completed a minimum of one (1) year of practical
                          residency or the equivalent in this area and a minimum of
                          sixty (60) hours field experience prior to or following
                          residency;

                  (5)     Has demonstrated the pedagogical competencies of the
                          Rhode Island Professional Teaching Standards (RIPTS);

                  (6)     Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies
                          as prescribed by the RIDE-approved national professional
                          association;

                  (7)     Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable
                          student standards and proficiency in designing and
                          implementing standards-based instruction and assessment;
                          and

                  (8)     Has met all content testing requirements for this certification
                          area.

           b.     Option Two: Adding an additional certificate: Secondary

                  (1)     Holds a current Rhode Island Secondary Teacher, grades 6-
                          12 certificate;

                  (2)     Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                          Rhode Island; and


86
                  (3)     Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                          certification area.

           c.     Option Three: Adding an additional certificate: Middle Grades

                  (1)     Holds a current Rhode Island Middle Grades Teacher,
                          grades 5-8 certificate;

                  (2)     Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                          Rhode Island;

                  (3)     Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                          certification area; and

           d.     Option Four: Adding an additional certificate: All Grades

                  (1)     Holds a current Rhode Island All Grades Teacher, grades
                          PK-12 certificate;

                  (2)     Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                          grades 6 through 12 in Rhode Island;

                  (3)     Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                          certification area.

C.   Secondary Grades Business Education Teacher, Grades 6-12

     1.    Validity of Certificate:

           a.     This certificate is valid for assignment as a Secondary Grades
                  Business Education Teacher in Grades Six to Twelve 6-12 in
                  Rhode Island Public Schools.

     2.    Requirements:

           a.     Option One: Approved Program

                  (1)     Has completed an approved program in this certification
                          area;

                  (2)     Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited
                          institution;

                  (3)     Has completed a major or the equivalent in Business or a
                          closely related field;

                  (4)     Has completed a minimum of one (1) year of practical
                          residency or the equivalent in this area and a minimum of
                          sixty (60) hours field experience prior to or following
                          residency;
87
                 (5)   Has demonstrated the pedagogical competencies of the
                       Rhode Island Professional Teaching Standards (RIPTS);

                 (6)   Has demonstrated the content and pedagogical
                       competencies as prescribed by the RIDE-approved national
                       professional association;

                 (7)   Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable
                       student standards and proficiency in designing and
                       implementing standards-based instruction and assessment;
                       and

                 (8)   Has met all content testing requirements for this certification
                       area.

           b.    Option Two: Adding an additional certificate: Secondary

                 (1)   Holds a current Rhode Island Secondary Teacher, grades 6-
                       12 certificate;

                 (2)   Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                       Rhode Island; and

                 (3)   Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                       certification area.

           c.    Option Three: Adding an additional certificate: Middle Grades

                 (1)   Holds a current Rhode Island Middle Grades Teacher,
                       grades 5-8 certificate;

                 (2)   Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                       Rhode Island;

                 (3)   Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                       certification area.

           d.    Option Four: Adding an additional certificate: All Grades

                 (1)   Holds a current Rhode Island All Grades Teacher, grades
                       PK-12 certificate;

                 (2)   Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                       grades 6 through 12 in Rhode Island;

                 (3)   Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                       certification area.

D.   Secondary Grades Career and Technical Education Teacher, Grades 6-12

88
     1.   Validity of Certificate:

          a.     This certificate is valid for assignment as a Secondary Grades
                 Career and Technical Education Teacher in Grades Six to Twelve
                 (6 to 12) in the specific career and technical education area of
                 certification in Rhode Island Public Schools.

     2.   Requirements:

          a.     Has completed an approved program in this certification area;

          b.     If applicable, holds a valid occupational license/certification in the
                 career and technical area issued by the appropriate Rhode Island
                 governing body;

          c.     Holds the appropriate level of education for the CTE area sought as
                 identified by RIDE;

          d.     Has completed a minimum of one (1) year of residency in this area
                 and a minimum of sixty (60) hours field experience prior to or
                 following residency. Individuals who have successfully completed
                 three (3) years of teaching in Rhode Island while holding a CTE
                 Preliminary Certificate are not required to complete a residency;

          e.     Has demonstrated the pedagogical competencies of the Rhode
                 Island Professional Teaching Standards (RIPTS);

          f.     Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies as
                 prescribed by the RIDE-approved association for the specific career
                 and technical area, when available;

          g.     Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable student
                 standards and proficiency in designing and implementing
                 standards-based instruction and assessment;

          h.     Has five (5) years of work experience in the specific career and
                 technical area if holds a high school diploma. The applicant has
                 three (3) years of work experience in the career and technical area
                 if the applicant holds an associate's or bachelor's degree in the
                 career and technical area; and

          i.     Has met all pedagogy and content testing requirements for this
                 certification area.

          j.     Individuals who hold advanced state issued licenses or advanced
                 industry certificates are not required to complete content testing
                 requirements.



89
           k.     Any work experience or degree completed more than ten (10) years
                  prior to the date of application must meet content testing
                  requirements regardless of other licenses held.

     3.    Individuals who hold a valid RI teacher certificate may meet equivalent
           occupational experience by meeting RIDE-approved criteria. RIDE will
           develop criteria for significant occupational experience by January 2026
           for Council approval.

E.   Secondary Grades Chemistry Teacher, Grades 6-12

     1.    Validity of Certificate:

           a.     This certificate is valid for assignment as a Secondary Grades
                  Chemistry Teacher in Grades Six to Twelve (6 to 12) in Rhode
                  Island Public Schools.

     2.    Requirements:

           a.     Option One: Approved Program

                  (1)     Has completed an approved program in this certification
                          area;

                  (2)     Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited
                          institution;

                  (3)     Has completed a major or the equivalent in Chemistry or a
                          closely related field;

                  (4)     Has completed a minimum of one (1) year of practical
                          residency or the equivalent in this area and a minimum of
                          sixty (60) hours field experience prior to or following
                          residency;

                  (5)     Has demonstrated the pedagogical competencies of the
                          Rhode Island Professional Teaching Standards (RIPTS);

                  (6)     Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies
                          as prescribed by the RIDE-approved national professional
                          association;

                  (7)     Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable
                          student standards and proficiency in designing and
                          implementing standards-based instruction and assessment;
                          and

                  (8)     Has met all content testing requirements for this certification
                          area.

90
           b.     Option Two: Adding an additional certificate: Secondary

                  (1)     Holds a current Rhode Island Secondary Teacher, grades 6-
                          12 certificate;

                  (2)     Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                          Rhode Island; and

                  (3)     Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                          certification area.

           c.     Option Three: Adding an additional certificate: Middle Grades

                  (1)     Holds a current Rhode Island Middle Grades Teacher,
                          grades 5-8 certificate;

                  (2)     Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                          Rhode Island; and

                  (3)     Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                          certification area.

           d.     Option Four: Adding an additional certificate: All Grades

                  (1)     Holds a current Rhode Island All Grades Teacher, grades
                          PK-12 certificate;

                  (2)     Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                          grades 6 through 12 in Rhode Island; and

                  (3)     Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                          certification area.

F.   Secondary Grades English Teacher, Grades 6-12

     1.    Validity of Certificate:

           a.     This certificate is valid for assignment as a Secondary Grades
                  English Teacher in Grades Six to Twelve (6 to 12) in Rhode Island
                  Public Schools.

     2.    Requirements:

           a.     Option One: Approved Program

                  (1)     Has completed an approved program in this certification
                          area;

                  (2)     Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited
                          institution;
91
          (3)   Has completed a major or the equivalent in English or a
                closely related field;

          (4)   Has completed a minimum of one (1) year of practical
                residency or the equivalent in this area and a minimum of
                sixty (60) hours field experience prior to or following
                residency;

          (5)   Has demonstrated the pedagogical competencies of the
                Rhode Island Professional Teaching Standards (RIPTS);

          (6)   Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies
                as prescribed by the RIDE-approved national professional
                association;

          (7)   Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable
                student standards and proficiency in designing and
                implementing standards-based instruction and assessment;
                and

          (8)   Has met all content testing requirements for this certification
                area.

     b.   Option Two: Adding an additional certificate: Secondary

          (1)   Holds a current Rhode Island Secondary Teacher, grades 6-
                12 certificate;

          (2)   Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                Rhode Island; and

          (3)   Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                certification area.

     c.   Option Three: Adding an additional certificate: Middle Grades

          (1)   Holds a current Rhode Island Middle Grades Teacher,
                grades 5-8 certificate;

          (2)   Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                Rhode Island; and

          (3)   Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                certification area.

     d.   Option Four: Adding an additional certificate: All Grades

          (1)   Holds a current Rhode Island All Grades Teacher, grades
                PK-12 certificate;

92
                  (2)     Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                          grades 6 through 12 in Rhode Island;

                  (3)     Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                          certification area.

G.   Secondary Grades General Science Teacher, Grades 6-12

     1.    Validity of Certificate:

           a.     This certificate is valid for assignment as a Secondary Grades
                  General Science Teacher in Grades Six to Twelve (6 to 12) in
                  Rhode Island Public Schools.

     2.    Requirements:

           a.     Option One: Approved Program

                  (1)     Has completed an approved program in this certification
                          area;

                  (2)     Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited
                          institution;

                  (3)     Has completed a major or the equivalent in General Science
                          or a closely related field;

                  (4)     Has completed a minimum of one (1) year of practical
                          residency or the equivalent in this area and a minimum of
                          sixty (60) hours field experience prior to or following
                          residency;

                  (5)     Has demonstrated the pedagogical competencies of the
                          Rhode Island Professional Teaching Standards (RIPTS);

                  (6)     Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies
                          as prescribed by the RIDE-approved national professional
                          association;

                  (7)     Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable
                          student standards and proficiency in designing and
                          implementing standards-based instruction and assessment;
                          and

                  (8)     Has met all pedagogy and content testing requirements for
                          this certification area.

           b.     Option Two


93
                  (1)     Hold certification in any two (2) of the other three (3)
                          secondary grades science areas (Biology, Chemistry,
                          Physics) pursuant to R.I. Gen. Laws § 16-11-3.

           c.     Option Three: Adding an additional certificate: Secondary

                  (1)     Holds a current Rhode Island Secondary Teacher, grades 6-
                          12 certificate;

                  (2)     Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                          Rhode Island; and

                  (3)     Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                          certification area.

           d.     Option Four: Adding an additional certificate: Middle Grades

                  (1)     Holds a current Rhode Island Middle Grades Teacher,
                          grades 5-8 certificate;

                  (2)     Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                          Rhode Island; and

                  (3)     Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                          certification area.

           e.     Option Five: Adding an additional certificate: All Grades

                  (1)     Holds a current Rhode Island All Grades Teacher, grades
                          PK-12 certificate;

                  (2)     Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                          grades 6 through 12 in Rhode Island; and

                  (3)     Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                          certification area.

H.   Secondary Grades Mathematics Teacher, Grades 6-12

     1.    Validity of Certificate:

           a.     This certificate is valid for assignment as a Secondary Grades
                  Mathematics Teacher in Grades Six to Twelve (6 to 12) in Rhode
                  Island Public Schools.

     2.    Requirements:

           a.     Option One: Approved Program


94
          (1)   Has completed an approved program in this certification
                area;

          (2)   Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited
                institution;

          (3)   Has completed a major or the equivalent in Mathematics or a
                closely related field;

          (4)   Has completed a minimum of one (1) year of practical
                residency or the equivalent in this area and a minimum of
                sixty (60) hours field experience prior to or following
                residency;

          (5)   Has demonstrated the pedagogical competencies of the
                Rhode Island Professional Teaching Standards (RIPTS);

          (6)   Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies
                as prescribed by the RIDE-approved national professional
                association;

          (7)   Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable
                student standards and proficiency in designing and
                implementing standards-based instruction and assessment;
                and

          (8)   Has met all content testing requirements for this certification
                area.

     b.   Option Two: Adding an additional certificate: Secondary

          (1)   Holds a current Rhode Island Secondary Teacher, grades 6-
                12 certificate;

          (2)   Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                Rhode Island; and

          (3)   Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                certification area.

     c.   Option Three: Adding an additional certificate: Middle Grades

          (1)   Holds a current Rhode Island Middle Grades Teacher,
                grades 5-8 certificate;

          (2)   Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                Rhode Island; and



95
                  (3)     Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                          certification area.

           d.     Option Four: Adding an additional certificate: All Grades

                  (1)     Holds a current Rhode Island All Grades Teacher, grades
                          PK-12 certificate;

                  (2)     Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                          grades 6 through 12 in Rhode Island; and

                  (3)     Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                          certification area.

I.   Secondary Grades Physics Teacher, Grades 6-12

     1.    Validity of Certificate:

           a.     This certificate is valid for assignment as a Secondary Grades
                  Physics Teacher in Grades Six to Twelve (6 to 12) in Rhode Island
                  Public Schools.

     2.    Requirements:

           a.     Option One: Approved Program

                  (1)     Has completed an approved program in this certification
                          area;

                  (2)     Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited
                          institution;

                  (3)     Has completed a major or the equivalent in Physics or a
                          closely related field;

                  (4)     Has completed a minimum of one (1) year of practical
                          residency or the equivalent in this area and a minimum of
                          sixty (60) hours field experience prior to or following
                          residency;

                  (5)     Has demonstrated the pedagogical competencies of the
                          Rhode Island Professional Teaching Standards (RIPTS);

                  (6)     Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies
                          as prescribed by the RIDE-approved national professional
                          association;

                  (7)     Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable
                          student standards and proficiency in designing and

96
                          implementing standards-based instruction and assessment;
                          and

                  (8)     Has met all content testing requirements for this certification
                          area.

           b.     Option Two: Adding an additional certificate: Secondary

                  (1)     Holds a current Rhode Island Secondary Teacher, grades 6-
                          12 certificate;

                  (2)     Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                          Rhode Island; and

                  (3)     Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                          certification area.

           c.     Option Three: Adding an additional certificate: Middle Grades

                  (1)     Holds a current Rhode Island Middle Grades Teacher,
                          grades 5-8 certificate;

                  (2)     Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                          Rhode Island; and

                  (3)     Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                          certification area.

           d.     Option Four: Adding an additional certificate: All Grades

                  (1)     Holds a current Rhode Island All Grades Teacher, grades
                          PK-12 certificate;

                  (2)     Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                          grades 6 through 12 in Rhode Island; and

                  (3)     Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                          certification area.

J.   Secondary Grades Social Studies Teacher, Grades 6-12

     1.    Validity of Certificate:

           a.     This certificate is valid for assignment as a Secondary Grades
                  Social Studies Teacher in Grades Six to Twelve (6 to 12) in Rhode
                  Island Public Schools. This certificate is also valid for teaching
                  secondary history, anthropology, economics, geography, political
                  science, and sociology.

     2.    Requirements:
97
     a.   Option One: Approved Program

          (1)   Has completed an approved program in this certification
                area;

          (2)   Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited
                institution;

          (3)   Has completed a major or the equivalent in Social Studies or
                a closely related field;

          (4)   Has completed a minimum of one (1) year of practical
                residency or the equivalent in this area and a minimum of
                sixty (60) hours field experience prior to or following
                residency;

          (5)   Has demonstrated the pedagogical competencies of the
                Rhode Island Professional Teaching Standards (RIPTS);

          (6)   Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies
                as prescribed by the RIDE-approved national professional
                association;

          (7)   Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable
                student standards and proficiency in designing and
                implementing standards-based instruction and assessment;
                and

          (8)   Has met all content testing requirements for this certification
                area.

     b.   Option Two: Adding an additional certificate: Secondary

          (1)   Holds a current Rhode Island Secondary Teacher, grades 6-
                12 certificate;

          (2)   Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                Rhode Island; and

          (3)   Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                certification area.

     c.   Option Three: Adding an additional certificate: Middle Grades

          (1)   Holds a current Rhode Island Middle Grades Teacher,
                grades 5-8 certificate;

          (2)   Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                Rhode Island; and

98
                  (3)     Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                          certification area.

           d.     Option Four: Adding an additional certificate: All Grades

                  (1)     Holds a current Rhode Island All Grades Teacher, grades
                          PK-12 certificate;

                  (2)     Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                          grades 6 through 12 in Rhode Island; and

                  (3)     Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                          certification area.

K.   Secondary Grades Special Education Teacher, Grades 6-12

     1.    Validity of Certificate:

           a.     This certificate is valid for assignment as a Secondary Grades
                  Special Education Teacher in Grades Six to Twelve (6 to 12) in
                  Rhode Island Public Schools.

           b.     Teachers who hold only Special Education certification may work in
                  self-contained settings in the content area(s) in which they are able
                  to demonstrate competency as determined by the local education
                  agency or may provide services directly to students in general
                  education or other settings in any content area.

     2.    Requirements:

           a.     Has completed an approved program in this certification area;

           b.     Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited institution;

           c.     Has completed a minimum of one (1) year of practical residency or
                  the equivalent in this area and a minimum of sixty (60) hours field
                  experience prior to or following residency;

           d.     Has demonstrated the pedagogical competencies of the Rhode
                  Island Professional Teaching Standards (RIPTS);

           e.     Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies as
                  prescribed by the RIDE-approved national professional association;

           f.     Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable student
                  standards and proficiency in designing and implementing
                  standards-based instruction and assessment; and

           g.     Has met all pedagogy and content testing requirements for this
                  certification area.
99
L.    Secondary Grades MLL Integrated Content Teacher, Grades 6-12

      1.    Validity of Certificate:

            This certificate is valid for assignment as a Secondary Grades MLL
            Integrated Content Teacher in Grades 6-12 in Rhode Island Public
            Schools.

      2.    Requirements:

            This certificate can be added to extend a Secondary Grades Education
            Teacher Certificate or a Secondary Grades Special Education Teacher
            Certificate

            a.     Holds a certificate in Secondary Grades Education or Secondary
                   Grades Special Education;

            b.     Has completed coursework in the following: Second Language
                   Acquisition Theory and Practice; Linguistics and the Structure of
                   English for Language Teaching; Socio-Cultural Studies in Teaching
                   Diverse Learners; Foundations of MLL Content-Based Instruction
                   and Assessment, including instructional technology; and
                   Introduction to Content-Based Oracy and Literacy Development for
                   Multilingual Learners;

            c.     Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited institution;

            d.     Has completed a minimum of forty-five (45) hours of practicum in
                   this area;

            e.     Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies as
                   prescribed by the RIDE-approved national professional association;

            f.     Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable student
                   standards and proficiency in designing and implementing
                   standards-based instruction and assessment;

            g.     Has met all content testing requirements for this certification area.

M.    Secondary Grades Bilingual and Dual Language Education Teacher, Grades 6-
      12

      1.    Validity of Certificate:

            This certificate is valid for assignment as a Secondary Grades Bilingual
            and Dual Language Education Teacher in Grades Six to Twelve (6 to 12)
            in Rhode Island Public Schools.

      2.    Requirements:

100
            a.     Holds certification in Secondary Grades Agriculture, Biology,
                   Business Education, Chemistry, English, General Science,
                   Mathematics, Physics, or Social Studies;

            b.     Has completed an approved program in this certification area;

            c.     Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited institution;

            d.     Has completed a minimum of forty-five (45) hours of practicum in
                   this area;

            e.     Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies as
                   prescribed by the RIDE-approved national professional association;

            f.     Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable student
                   standards and proficiency in designing and implementing
                   standards-based instruction and assessment;

            g.     Has met all pedagogy and content testing requirements for this
                   certification area; and

            h.     Has demonstrated proficiency in the first (1st) and second (2nd)
                   language of instruction.

      3.    Individuals who hold this certificate may obtain English to Speakers of
            Other Languages certification by demonstrating English proficiency and
            completing coursework in First and Second Language Acquisition, English
            Linguistics and Curriculum, and Assessment and Methods for English
            Learners. The Council will review this pathway every five (5) years for
            continuing approval.

N.    Financial Literacy may be taught by any person holding the following valid Rhode
      Island certificate(s):

      1.    Secondary Grades Business Teacher, Grades 6-12;

      2.    Secondary Grades Mathematics Teacher, Grades 6-12;

      3.    Secondary Grades Social Studies Teacher, Grades 6-12; or

      4.    Any Secondary Grades Certificate with evidence of completion of RIDE-
            vetted professional learning in financial literacy.

1.9.5 All Grades Teacher Certificates

A.    All Grades Adapted Physical Education Teacher, Grades PK-12

      1.    Validity of Certificate:


101
            This certificate is valid for assignment as an All Grades Adapted Physical
            Education Teacher in Grades PK-12 in Rhode Island Public Schools.

      2.    Requirements:

            a.     Holds certification in All Grades Physical Education;

            b.     Has completed an approved program in this certification area;

            c.     Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited institution;

            d.     Has completed seventy-five (75) hours of practicum;

            e.     Has demonstrated the pedagogical competencies of the Rhode
                   Island Professional Teaching Standards (RIPTS);

            f.     Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies as
                   prescribed by the RIDE-approved national professional association;

            g.     Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable student
                   standards and proficiency in designing and implementing
                   standards-based instruction and assessment; and

            h.     Has met all pedagogy and content testing requirements for this
                   certification area.

B.    All Grades Art Teacher, Grades PK-12

      1.    Validity of Certificate:

            This certificate is valid for assignment as an All Grades Art Teacher in
            Grades PK-12 in Rhode Island Public Schools.

      2.    Requirements:

            a.     Option One: Approved Program

                   (1)     Has completed an approved program in this certification
                           area;

                   (2)     Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited
                           institution;

                   (3)     Has completed a major or the equivalent in Art or a closely
                           related field;

                   (4)     Has completed a minimum of one (1) year of practical
                           residency or the equivalent in this area and a minimum of
                           sixty (60) hours field experience prior to or following
                           residency;
102
                   (5)     Has demonstrated the pedagogical competencies of the
                           Rhode Island Professional Teaching Standards (RIPTS);

                   (6)     Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies
                           as prescribed by the RIDE-approved national professional
                           association;

                   (7)     Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable
                           student standards and proficiency in designing and
                           implementing standards-based instruction and assessment;
                           and

                   (8)     Has met all pedagogy and content testing requirements for
                           this certification area.

            b.     Option Two: Adding an additional certificate: All Grades

                   (1)     Holds a current Rhode Island All Grades Teacher, grades
                           PK-12 certificate;

                   (2)     Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                           Rhode Island; and

                   (3)     Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                           certification area.

C.    All Grades Dance Teacher, Grades PK-12

      1.    Validity of Certificate:

            This certificate is valid for assignment as an All Grades Dance Teacher in
            Grades PK-12 in Rhode Island Public Schools.

      2.    Requirements:

            a.     Option One: Approved Program

                   (1)     Has completed an approved program in this certification
                           area;

                   (2)     Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited
                           institution;

                   (3)     Has completed a major or the equivalent in Dance or a
                           closely related field;

                   (4)     Has completed a minimum of one (1) year of practical
                           residency or the equivalent in this area and a minimum of
                           sixty (60) hours field experience prior to or following
                           residency;
103
                   (5)     Has demonstrated the pedagogical competencies of the
                           Rhode Island Professional Teaching Standards (RIPTS);

                   (6)     Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies
                           as prescribed by the RIDE-approved national professional
                           association;

                   (7)     Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable
                           student standards and proficiency in designing and
                           implementing standards-based instruction and assessment;
                           and

                   (8)     Has met all pedagogy and content testing requirements for
                           this certification area.

            b.     Option Two: Adding an additional certificate: All Grades

                   (1)     Holds a current Rhode Island All Grades Teacher, grades
                           PK-12 certificate;

                   (2)     Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                           Rhode Island; and

                   (3)     Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                           certification area.

D.    All Grades Family and Consumer Science Teacher, Grades PK-12

      1.    Validity of Certificate:

            This certificate is valid for assignment as an All Grades Family and
            Consumer Science Teacher in Grades PK-12 in Rhode Island Public
            Schools.

      2.    Requirements:

            a.     Option One: Approved Program

                   (1)     Has completed an approved program in this certification
                           area;

                   (2)     Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited
                           institution;

                   (3)     Has completed a major or the equivalent in Family and
                           Consumer Science or a closely related field;

                   (4)     Has completed a minimum of one (1) year of practical
                           residency or the equivalent in this area and a minimum of

104
                           sixty (60) hours field experience prior to or following
                           residency;

                   (5)     Has demonstrated the pedagogical competencies of the
                           Rhode Island Professional Teaching Standards (RIPTS);

                   (6)     Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies
                           as prescribed by the RIDE-approved national professional
                           association;

                   (7)     Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable
                           student standards and proficiency in designing and
                           implementing standards-based instruction and assessment;
                           and

                   (8)     Has met all pedagogy and content testing requirements for
                           this certification area.

            b.     Option Two: Adding an additional certificate: All Grades

                   (1)     Holds a current Rhode Island All Grades Teacher, grades
                           PK-12 certificate;

                   (2)     Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                           Rhode Island; and

                   (3)     Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                           certification area.

E.    All Grades Health Teacher, Grades PK-12

      1.    Validity of Certificate:

            This certificate is valid for assignment as an All Grades Health Teacher in
            Grades PK-12 in Rhode Island Public Schools.

      2.    Requirements:

            a.     Option One: Approved Program

                   (1)     Has completed an approved program in this certification
                           area;

                   (2)     Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited
                           institution;

                   (3)     Has completed a major or the equivalent in Health or a
                           closely related field;


105
                   (4)     Has completed a minimum of one (1) year of practical
                           residency or the equivalent in this area and a minimum of
                           sixty (60) hours field experience prior to or following
                           residency;

                   (5)     Has demonstrated the pedagogical competencies of the
                           Rhode Island Professional Teaching Standards (RIPTS);

                   (6)     Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies
                           as prescribed by the RIDE-approved national professional
                           association;

                   (7)     Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable
                           student standards and proficiency in designing and
                           implementing standards-based instruction and assessment;
                           and

                   (8)     Has met all pedagogy and content testing requirements for
                           this certification area.

            b.     Option Two: Adding an additional certificate: All Grades

                   (1)     Holds a current Rhode Island All Grades Teacher, grades
                           PK-12 certificate;

                   (2)     Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                           Rhode Island; and

                   (3)     Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                           certification area.

F.    All Grades Health, Physical Education, and Adaptive Physical Education
      Teacher, Grades PK-12

      1.    Validity of Certificate:

            This certificate is valid for assignment as an All Grades Health , Physical
            Education, and Adaptive Physical Education Teacher in Grades PK-12 in
            Rhode Island Public Schools.

      2.    Requirements:

            a.     Option One: Approved Program

                   (1)     Has completed an approved program in this certification
                           area;

                   (2)     Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited
                           institution;

106
                   (3)     Has completed a major or the equivalent in Health , Physical
                           Education, and Adaptive Physical Education or a closely
                           related field;

                   (4)     Has completed a minimum of one (1) year of practical
                           residency or the equivalent in this area and a minimum of
                           sixty (60) hours field experience prior to or following
                           residency;

                   (5)     Has demonstrated the pedagogical competencies of the
                           Rhode Island Professional Teaching Standards (RIPTS);

                   (6)     Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies
                           as prescribed by the RIDE-approved national professional
                           association;

                   (7)     Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable
                           student standards and proficiency in designing and
                           implementing standards-based instruction and assessment;
                           and

                   (8)     Has met all pedagogy and content testing requirements for
                           this certification area.

            b.     Option Two: Adding an additional certificate: All Grades

                   (1)     Holds a current Rhode Island All Grades Teacher, grades
                           PK-12 certificate;

                   (2)     Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                           Rhode Island; and

                   (3)     Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                           certification area.

G     All Grades Library Media Teacher, Grades PK-12

      1.    Validity of Certificate:

            This certificate is valid for assignment as an All Grades Library Media
            Teacher in Grades PK-12 in Rhode Island Public Schools.

      2.    Requirements:

            a.     Option One: Approved Program

                   (1)     Has completed an approved program in this certification
                           area;


107
                   (2)     Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited
                           institution;

                   (3)     Has completed a major or the equivalent in Library Media or
                           a closely related field;

                   (4)     Has completed a minimum of one (1) year of practical
                           residency or the equivalent in this area and a minimum of
                           sixty (60) hours field experience prior to or following
                           residency;

                   (5)     Has demonstrated the pedagogical competencies of the
                           Rhode Island Professional Teaching Standards (RIPTS);

                   (6)     Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies
                           as prescribed by the RIDE-approved national professional
                           association;

                   (7)     Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable
                           student standards and proficiency in designing and
                           implementing standards-based instruction and assessment;
                           and

                   (8)     Has met all pedagogy and content testing requirements for
                           this certification area.

            b.     Option Two: Adding an additional certificate: All Grades

                   (1)     Holds a current Rhode Island All Grades Teacher, grades
                           PK-12 certificate;

                   (2)     Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                           Rhode Island; and

                   (3)     Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                           certification area.

H.    All Grades Music Teacher, Grades PK-12

      1.    Validity of Certificate:

            This certificate is valid for assignment as an All Grades Music Teacher in
            Grades PK-12 in Rhode Island Public Schools.

      2.    Requirements:

            a.     Option One: Approved Program

                   (1)     Has completed an approved program in this certification
                           area;
108
                   (2)     Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited
                           institution;

                   (3)     Has completed a major or the equivalent in Music or a
                           closely related field;

                   (4)     Has completed a minimum of one (1) year of practical
                           residency or the equivalent in this area and a minimum of
                           sixty (60) hours field experience prior to or following
                           residency;

                   (5)     Has demonstrated the pedagogical competencies of the
                           Rhode Island Professional Teaching Standards (RIPTS);

                   (6)     Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies
                           as prescribed by the RIDE-approved national professional
                           association;

                   (7)     Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable
                           student standards and proficiency in designing and
                           implementing standards-based instruction and assessment;
                           and

                   (8)     Has met all pedagogy and content testing requirements for
                           this certification area.

            b.     Option Two: Adding an additional certificate: All Grades

                   (1)     Holds a current Rhode Island All Grades Teacher, grades
                           PK-12 certificate;

                   (2)     Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                           Rhode Island; and

                   (3)     Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                           certification area.

I.    All Grades Physical Education Teacher, Grades PK-12

      1.    Validity of Certificate:

            This certificate is valid for assignment as an All Grades Physical
            Education Teacher in Grades PK-12 in Rhode Island Public Schools.

      2.    Requirements:

            a.     Option One: Approved Program

                   (1)     Has completed an approved program in this certification
                           area;
109
                   (2)     Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited
                           institution;

                   (3)     Has completed a major or the equivalent in Physical
                           Education or a closely related field;

                   (4)     Has completed a minimum of one (1) year of practical
                           residency or the equivalent in this area and a minimum of
                           sixty (60) hours field experience prior to or following
                           residency;

                   (5)     Has demonstrated the pedagogical competencies of the
                           Rhode Island Professional Teaching Standards (RIPTS);

                   (6)     Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies
                           as prescribed by the RIDE-approved national professional
                           association;

                   (7)     Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable
                           student standards and proficiency in designing and
                           implementing standards-based instruction and assessment;
                           and

                   (8)     Has met all pedagogy and content testing requirements for
                           this certification area.

            b.     Option Two: Adding an additional certificate: All Grades

                   (1)     Holds a current Rhode Island All Grades Teacher, grades
                           PK-12 certificate;

                   (2)     Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                           Rhode Island; and

                   (3)     Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                           certification area.

J.    All Grades School Nurse Teacher, Grades PK-12

      1.    Validity of Certificate:

            This certificate is valid for assignment as an All Grades School Nurse
            Teacher and as a Health Teacher in Grades PK-12 in Rhode Island Public
            Schools.

      2.    Requirements:

            a.     Has completed an approved program in this certification area;

            b.     Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited institution;
110
            c.     Has completed a professional nursing program;

            d.     Has three (3) years of documented experience as a professional
                   nurse;

            e.     Has a current Rhode Island Nursing License as set forth in the
                   Rhode Island Department of Health Regulation 216-RICR-40-05-3,
                   Licensing of Nurses and Standards for the Approval of Basic
                   Nursing Education Programs;

            f.     Has completed a minimum of one (1) year of practical residency or
                   the equivalent in this area and a minimum of sixty (60) hours field
                   experience prior to or following residency;

            g.     Has demonstrated the pedagogical competencies of the Rhode
                   Island Professional Teaching Standards (RIPTS);

            h.     Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies as
                   prescribed by the RIDE-approved national professional association;

            i.     Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable student
                   standards and proficiency in designing and implementing
                   standards-based instruction and assessment; and

            j.     Has met all pedagogy and content testing requirements for this
                   certification area.

K.    All Grades Technology Education Teacher, Grades PK-12

      1.    Validity of Certificate:

            This certificate is valid for assignment as an All Grades Technology
            Education Teacher in Grades PK-12 in Rhode Island Public Schools.

      2.    Requirements:

            a.     Option One: Approved Program

                   (1)     Has completed an approved program in this certification
                           area;

                   (2)     Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited
                           institution;

                   (3)     Has completed a major or the equivalent in Technology
                           Education or a closely related field;

                   (4)     Has completed a minimum of one (1) year of practical
                           residency or the equivalent in this area and a minimum of

111
                           sixty (60) hours field experience prior to or following
                           residency;

                   (5)     Has demonstrated the pedagogical competencies of the
                           Rhode Island Professional Teaching Standards (RIPTS);

                   (6)     Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies
                           as prescribed by the RIDE-approved national professional
                           association;

                   (7)     Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable
                           student standards and proficiency in designing and
                           implementing standards-based instruction and assessment;
                           and

                   (8)     Has met all pedagogy and content testing requirements for
                           this certification area.

            b.     Option Two: Adding an additional certificate: All Grades

                   (1)     Holds a current Rhode Island All Grades Teacher, grades
                           PK-12 certificate;

                   (2)     Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                           Rhode Island; and

                   (3)     Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                           certification area.

L.    All Grades Theatre Teacher, Grades PK-12

      1.    Validity of Certificate:

            This certificate is valid for assignment as an All Grades Theatre Teacher
            in Grades PK-12 in Rhode Island Public Schools.

      2.    Requirements:

            a.     Option One: Approved Program

                   (1)     Has completed an approved program in this certification
                           area;

                   (2)     Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited
                           institution;

                   (3)     Has completed a major or the equivalent in Theatre or a
                           closely related field;


112
                   (4)     Has completed a minimum of one (1) year of practical
                           residency or the equivalent in this area and a minimum of
                           sixty (60) hours field experience prior to or following
                           residency;

                   (5)     Has demonstrated the pedagogical competencies of the
                           Rhode Island Professional Teaching Standards (RIPTS);

                   (6)     Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies
                           as prescribed by the RIDE-approved national professional
                           association;

                   (7)     Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable
                           student standards and proficiency in designing and
                           implementing standards-based instruction and assessment;
                           and

                   (8)     Has met all pedagogy and content testing requirements for
                           this certification area.

            b.     Option Two: Adding an additional certificate: All Grades

                   (1)     Holds a current Rhode Island All Grades Teacher, grades
                           PK-12 certificate;

                   (2)     Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                           Rhode Island; and

                   (3)     Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                           certification area.

M.    All Grades World Language Teacher, Grades PK-12

      1.    Validity of Certificate:

            This certificate is valid for assignment as an All Grades World Language
            Teacher in a specific language in Grades PK-12 in Rhode Island Public
            Schools.

      2.    Requirements:

            a.     Option One: Approved Program

                   (1)     Has completed an approved program in this certification
                           area;

                   (2)     Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited
                           institution;


113
                   (3)     Has completed a major or the equivalent in a specific World
                           Language or a closely related field;

                   (4)     Has completed a minimum of one (1) year of practical
                           residency or the equivalent in this area and a minimum of
                           sixty (60) hours field experience prior to or following
                           residency;

                   (5)     Has demonstrated the pedagogical competencies of the
                           Rhode Island Professional Teaching Standards (RIPTS);

                   (6)     Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies
                           as prescribed by the RIDE-approved national professional
                           association;

                   (7)     Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable
                           student standards and proficiency in designing and
                           implementing standards-based instruction and assessment;
                           and

                   (8)     Has met all pedagogy and content testing requirements for
                           this certification area.

            b.     Option Two: Adding an additional certificate: All Grades

                   (1)     Holds a current Rhode Island All Grades Teacher, grades
                           PK-12 certificate;

                   (2)     Has four (4) years of successful teaching experience in
                           Rhode Island; and

                   (3)     Has passed all content testing requirements for this
                           certification area.

            c.     An educator preparation program may waive up to eighteen (18)
                   credits in language content for native speakers of the language for
                   which they will be certified to teach.

                   (1)     An individual must complete coursework in the linguistics,
                           culture, and literature of the language as well as a methods
                           course that deals specifically with the teaching of the
                           language for which they will be certified to teach.

N.    All Grades Special Education – Deaf and Hard of Hearing Teacher PK-12 –
      American Sign Language

      1.    Validity of Certificate:



114
            a.     This certificate is valid for assignment as a Special Education –
                   Deaf and Hard of Hearing Teacher – American Sign Language in
                   Grades PK-12 in Rhode Island Public Schools.

            b.     Teachers who do not hold additional certification in a general
                   education area may not serve as a teacher of record for early
                   childhood, elementary, middle or secondary classrooms.

      2.    Requirements:

            a.     Has completed an approved program in this certification area;

            b.     Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited institution;

            c.     Has completed a minimum of one (1) year of practical residency or
                   the equivalent in this area and a minimum of sixty (60) hours field
                   experience prior to or following residency;

            d.     Has demonstrated the pedagogical competencies of the Rhode
                   Island Professional Teaching Standards (RIPTS);

            e.     Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies as
                   prescribed by the RIDE-approved national professional association;

            f.     Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable student
                   standards and proficiency in designing and implementing
                   standards-based instruction and assessment;

            g.     Has demonstrated awareness in Oral/Aural Communication by
                   evidence of three (3) credits in Oral/Aural Communication. This
                   requirement may be met at certification issuance or first (1st)
                   renewal;

            h.     Has demonstrated competency in American Sign Language (ASL);
                   and

            i.     Has met all content testing requirements for this certification area.

O.    All Grades Special Education – Deaf and Hard of Hearing Teacher PK-12 –
      Oral/Aural Communication

      1.    Validity of Certificate:

            a.     This certificate is valid for assignment as a Special Education –
                   Deaf and Hard of Hearing Teacher – Oral/Aural Communication in
                   Grades PK-12 in Rhode Island Public Schools.




115
            b.     Teachers who do not hold additional certification in a general
                   education area may not serve as a teacher of record for early
                   childhood, elementary, middle or secondary classrooms.

      2.    Requirements pursuant to R.I. Gen. Laws § 16-25.2-4:

            a.     Has completed an approved program in this certification area;

            b.     Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited institution;

            c.     Has completed a minimum of one (1) year of practical residency or
                   the equivalent in this area and a minimum of sixty (60) hours field
                   experience prior to or following residency;

            d.     Has demonstrated the pedagogical competencies of the Rhode
                   Island Professional Teaching Standards (RIPTS);

            e.     Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies as
                   prescribed by the RIDE-approved national professional association;

            f.     Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable student
                   standards and proficiency in designing and implementing
                   standards-based instruction and assessment;

            g.     Has demonstrated awareness in American Sign Language (ASL)
                   either by evidence of the RI approved American Sign Language
                   assessment or three (3) credits in American Sign Language. This
                   requirement may be met at certification issuance or first (1st)
                   renewal; and

            i.     Has met all content testing requirements for this certification area.

P.    All Grades Special Education – Visually Impaired Teacher PK-12

      1.    Validity of Certificate:

            a.     This certificate is valid for assignment as a Special Education –
                   Visually Impaired Teacher in Grades PK-12 in Rhode Island Public
                   Schools.

            b.     Teachers who do not hold additional certification in a general
                   education area may not serve as a teacher of record for early
                   childhood, elementary, middle or secondary classrooms.

      2.    Requirements Pursuant to R.I. Gen. Laws § 16-25.1-4:

            a.     Has completed an approved program in this certification area;

            b.     Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited institution;

116
            c.     Has completed a minimum of one (1) year of practical residency or
                   the equivalent in this area and a minimum of sixty (60) hours field
                   experience prior to or following residency;

            d.     Has demonstrated the pedagogical competencies of the Rhode
                   Island Professional Teaching Standards (RIPTS);

            e.     Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies as
                   prescribed by the RIDE-approved national professional association;

            f.     Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable student
                   standards and proficiency in designing and implementing
                   standards-based instruction and assessment;

            g.     Has demonstrated competency in reading and writing Braille; and

            h.     Has met all content testing requirements for this certification area.

Q.    All Grades Special Education – Severe Intellectual Disability Teacher PK-12

      1.    Validity of Certificate:

            a.     This certificate is valid for assignment as a Special Education –
                   Severe Intellectual Disability Teacher in Grades PK-12 in Rhode
                   Island Public Schools.

            b.     Teachers who do not hold additional certification in a general
                   education area may not serve as a teacher of record for early
                   childhood, elementary, middle or secondary classrooms.

      2.    Requirements:

            a.     Has completed an approved program in this certification area;

            b.     Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited institution;

            c.     Has completed a minimum of one (1) year of practical residency or
                   the equivalent in this area and a minimum of sixty (60) hours field
                   experience prior to or following residency;

            d.     Has demonstrated the pedagogical competencies of the Rhode
                   Island Professional Teaching Standards (RIPTS);

            e.     Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies as
                   prescribed by the RIDE-approved national professional association;

            f.     Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable student
                   standards and proficiency in designing and implementing
                   standards-based instruction and assessment; and

117
            g.     Has met all content testing requirements for this certification area;

R.    All Grades Bilingual and Dual Language Education Teacher, Grades PK-12

      1.    Validity of Certificate:

            This certificate is valid for assignment as an All Grades Bilingual and Dual
            Language Education Teacher in Grades PK-12 in Rhode Island Public
            Schools

      2.    Requirements:

            a.     Holds certification in any All Grades content area;

            b.     Has completed an approved program in this certification area;

            c.     Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited institution;

            d.     Has completed a minimum of forty-five (45) hours of practicum in
                   this area;

            e.     Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies as
                   prescribed by the RIDE-approved national association;

            f.     Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable student
                   standards and proficiency in designing and implementing
                   standards-based instruction and assessment;

            g.     Has met all content testing requirements for this certification area;
                   and

            h.     Has demonstrated proficiency in the first (1st) and second (2nd)
                   language of instruction.

      3.    Individuals may obtain English to Speakers of Other Languages
            certification by demonstrating English proficiency and completing
            coursework in First and Second Language Acquisition, English Linguistics
            and Curriculum, and Assessment and Methods for English Learners.

      4.    The Council will review this pathway every five (5) years for continuing
            approval.

S.    All Grades English to Speakers of Other Languages Teacher, Grades PK-12

      1.    Validity of Certificate:

            a.     This certificate is valid for assignment as an English to Speakers of
                   Other Languages Teacher in Grades PK-12 in Rhode Island Public
                   Schools. Educators who hold this certificate may also teach in
                   English in dual language programs.
118
                   (1)    Educators holding only the All Grades English to Speakers
                          of Other Languages Teacher, Grades PK-12 certificate are
                          restricted to teaching English Language development and
                          may not serve as a teacher of record in early childhood,
                          elementary, middle level or secondary grades unless they
                          are also certified in the appropriate content area.

            b.     Individuals who have previously taught for less than two (2) years in
                   a dual language program must complete professional learning in
                   the foundations and implementation of dual language programming
                   as part of their accumulation of professional learning units (PLUs)
                   for certification renewal.

      2.    Requirements:

            a.     Has completed an approved program in this certification area;

            b.     Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited institution;

            c.     Has completed a minimum of one (1) year of practical residency or
                   the equivalent in this area and a minimum of sixty (60) hours field
                   experience prior to or following residency;

            d.     Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies as
                   prescribed by the RIDE-approved national professional association;

            e.     Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable student
                   standards and proficiency in designing and implementing
                   standards-based instruction and assessment; and

            f.     Has met all content testing requirements for this certification area.

      3.    The Council will review this pathway every five (5) years for continuing
            approval.

T.    All Grades MLL Integrated Content Teacher, Grades PK-12

      1.    Validity of Certificate

            This certificate is valid for assignment as an All Grades MLL Integrated
            Content Teacher in Grades PK-12 in Rhode Island Public Schools.

      2.    Requirements

            This certificate can be added to extend an All Grades Education Teacher
            Certificate

            a.     Holds a certificate in All Grades Education;


119
             b.     Has completed coursework in the following: Second Language
                    Acquisition Theory and Practice; Linguistics and the Structure of
                    English for Language Teaching; Socio-Cultural Studies in Teaching
                    Diverse Learners; Foundations of MLL Content-Based Instruction
                    and Assessment, including instruction al technology; and
                    Introduction to Content-Based Oracy and Literacy Development for
                    Multilingual Learners;

             c.     Holds a bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited institution;

             d.     Has completed a minimum of forty-five (45) hours of practicum in
                    this area;

             e.     Has demonstrated the content and pedagogical competencies as
                    prescribed by the RIDE-approved national professional association;

             f.     Has demonstrated a deep understanding of applicable student
                    standards and proficiency in designing and implementing
                    standards-based instruction and assessment;

             g.     Has met all content testing requirements for this certification area.

1.10 Administrator Certificate Areas
A.    Administrator certification is offered in a variety of PK-12 areas that qualify the
      administrator for specific assignments in Rhode Island Public Schools.

B.    Certification in administrator areas requires:

      1.     An advanced degree from a regionally accredited institution (except for
             school business manager);

      2.     Completion of an approved educator preparation program that ensures
             completers demonstrate the competencies within the certification field
             prescribed by the RIDE-approved professional association;

      3.     Field experience that includes a three hundred (300) hour internship for
             building level administrators; and

      4.     Passing scores on any knowledge of field testing required for the
             certification area.

1.10.1 Building Level Administrator Certificates

A.    Building Level Administrator PK-12

      1.     Validity of Certificate:



120
             This certificate is valid for assignment as a Building Level Administrator in
             Grades PK-12 in Rhode Island Public Schools.

      2.     Option One:

             a.     Has completed an approved program in this certification area;

             b,     Holds an advanced degree from a regionally accredited institution;

             c,     Has completed a minimum of a three hundred (300) hour internship
                    in this area;

             d.     Has three (3) years of PK-12 professional education experience;

             e.     Has demonstrated the professional competencies of the Rhode
                    Island Standards for Educational Leadership (RISEL) with an
                    emphasis on the content required of a building level administrator;

             f.     Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies as
                    prescribed by the RIDE-approved national professional association;
                    and

             g.     Has met all knowledge of field-testing requirements for this
                    certification area.

      3.     Option Two:

             a.     Has completed the requirements, pursuant to § 1.8.13.A.3 of this
                    Part, outlined for progression from the Fast-Track Principal
                    Preliminary Certificate.

1.10.2 District Level Administrator Certificates

A.    District Level Administrator-Curriculum, Instruction, and Assessment

      1.     Validity of Certificate:

             This certificate is valid for assignment as a District Level Administrator-
             Curriculum, Instruction, and Assessment in Grades PK-12 in Rhode Island
             Public Schools.

      2.     Requirements:

             a.     Holds certification as Building Level Administrator;

             b.     Has completed an approved program in this certification area;

             c.     Holds an advanced degree from a regionally accredited institution;


121
            d.     Has demonstrated the professional competencies of the Rhode
                   Island Standards for Educational Leadership (RISEL) with an
                   emphasis on the content required of a district level curriculum,
                   instruction, and assessment administrator;

            e.     Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies as
                   prescribed by the RIDE-approved national professional association;
                   and

            f.     Has met all knowledge of field testing requirements for this
                   certification area.

B.    District-Level Administrator – Special Education

      1.    Validity of Certificate:

            This certificate is valid for assignment as a District Level Administrator –
            Special Education in Grades PK-12 in Rhode Island Public Schools.

      2.    Requirements:

            a.     Has completed an approved program in this certification area; or

            b.     Has completed nine (9) graduate-level credits in Special Education
                   and has completed graduate-level coursework in the following
                   areas: supervision of Special Education programs and services,
                   supervision of personnel, supervision of instruction or program
                   evaluation, and school and district finance;

            c.     Holds an advanced degree from a regionally accredited institution;

            d.     Has three (3) years of professional education experience in
                   teaching as a special educator, speech and language pathologist,
                   school social worker, or school psychologist;

C.    District-Level Administrator – Multilingual Learners (MLL)

      1.    Validity of Certificate:

            This certificate is valid for assignment as a District-Level Administrator –
            Multilingual Learners in Grades PK-12 in Rhode Island Public Schools.

      2.    Requirements:

            a.     Has completed an approved program in this certification area; or

            b.     Has completed nine (9) graduate-level credits in Teaching English
                   to Speakers of Other Languages or Bilingual Dual Language and
                   has completed graduate-level coursework in the following areas:
                   Second Language Acquisition Theory and Practice; Linguistics and
122
                   the Structure of English for Language Teaching; Socio-Cultural
                   Studies in Teaching Multilingual Learners; Second Language
                   Teaching and Learning; Curriculum, Instruction, and Assessment;
                   Instructional Models; and Practicum/Field Experience and has
                   completed graduate-level coursework in the following areas:
                   supervision of MLL programs and services, and supervision of
                   personnel;

            c.     Holds an advanced degree from a regionally accredited institution.

            d.     Has three (3) years of professional education experience teaching
                   English to Speakers of Other Languages (ESOL), MLL Integrated
                   Content, or Bilingual/Dual Language (BDL).

            e.     Has demonstrated the professional competencies of the Rhode
                   Island Standards for Educational Leadership (RISEL) with an
                   emphasis on the content required of a district level MLL
                   Administrator;

            f.     Has demonstrated content competencies as prescribed by the
                   RIDE-approved national professional association; and

            g.     Has met all knowledge of field testing requirements for this
                   certification area.

D.    School Business Administrator

      1.    Validity of Certificate:

            This certificate is valid for assignment as a School Business Administrator
            in Grades PK-12 in Rhode Island Public Schools.

      2.    Requirements:

            a.     Holds a bachelor’s degree in business administration, finance, or a
                   related field from a regionally accredited institution ; or

            b.     Holds a bachelor’s degree in another area and has completed
                   coursework in accounting, finance, and management, including
                   credits in marketing, law, human resources, school finance, school
                   plant planning, or information systems; and

            c.     Three (3) years of professional experience in financial management
                   or school business operations;

E.    Superintendent of Schools

      1.    Validity of Certificate:


123
             This certificate is valid for assignment as a Superintendent of Schools in
             Grades PK-12 in Rhode Island Public Schools.

      2.     Requirements:

             a.     Has completed an approved program in this certification area;

             b.     Holds an advanced degree from a regionally accredited institution;

             c.     Holds building level administrator certificate or has significant
                    leadership experience in organizations other than schools;

             d.     Has demonstrated the professional competencies of the Rhode
                    Island Standards for Educational Leadership (RISEL) with an
                    emphasis on the content required of a superintendent of schools;

             e.     Has demonstrated content and pedagogical competencies as
                    prescribed by the RIDE-approved national professional association;
                    and

             f.     Has met all knowledge of field testing requirements for this
                    certification area.

1.11 Support Professional Certificate Areas
A.    Support Professional certification is offered in specific fields and for specific
      grade ranges that qualify the support professional for specific assignments in
      Rhode Island Public Schools.

B.    Certification in support professional areas requires:

      1.     An advanced degree from a regionally accredited institution ;

      2.     Completion of an approved educator preparation program that assures
             completers demonstrate the competencies within the certification field
             prescribed by the RIDE-approved professional association;

      3.     Field experience that includes a minimum of a three hundred (300) hour
             internship for instructional leaders, specialists/consultants, and school
             counselor certification areas; and

      4.     Passing scores on any knowledge of field testing required for the
             certification area.

1.11.1 Related Service Providers

A.    School Counselor

      1.     Validity of Certificate:

124
            This certificate is valid for assignment as a School Counselor in Grades
            PK-12 in Rhode Island Public Schools.

      2.    Requirements:

            a.     Has completed an approved program in this certification area;

            b.     Holds an advanced degree from a regionally accredited institution;

            c.     Has completed a minimum of three hundred (300) hours of
                   internship in this area;

            d.     Has demonstrated field competencies as prescribed by the RIDE-
                   approved national professional association; and

            e.     Has met all knowledge of field testing requirements for this
                   certification area.

B.    School Psychologist

      1.    Validity of Certificate:

            This certificate is valid for assignment as a School Psychologist in Grades
            PK-12 in Rhode Island Public Schools.

      2.    Requirements:

            a.     Has completed an approved program in this certification area;

            b.     Holds an advanced degree in school psychology from a regionally
                   accredited institution;

            c.     Has demonstrated field competencies as prescribed by the RIDE-
                   approved national professional association ; and

            d.     Has met all knowledge of field testing requirements for this
                   certification area.

C.    School Social Worker

      1.    Validity of Certificate:

            This certificate is valid for assignment as a School Social Worker in
            Grades PK-12 in Rhode Island Public Schools.

      2.    Requirements:

            a.     Has completed an approved program in this certification area;


125
            b.     Holds a master’s degree in social work from a regionally accredited
                   institution;

            c.     Currently holds a clinical social worker license issued by the Rhode
                   Island Board of Registration for Social Workers;

            d.     Has demonstrated field competencies as prescribed by the RIDE-
                   approved national professional association ; and

            e.     Has met all knowledge of field testing requirements for this
                   certification area.

D.    Speech and Language Pathologist

      1.    Validity of Certificate:

            This certificate is valid for assignment as a Speech and Language
            Pathologist in Grades PK-12 in Rhode Island Public Schools.

      2.    Requirements:

            a.     Has completed an approved program in this certification area;

            b.     Holds an advanced degree in Speech and Language Pathology
                   from a regionally accredited institution;

            c.     Has demonstrated field competencies as prescribed by the RIDE-
                   approved national professional association ; and

            d.     Has met all knowledge of field-testing requirements for this
                   certification area.

1.11.2 Specialists/Consultants

A.    Mathematics Specialist/Consultant

      1.    Validity of Certificate:

            This certificate is valid for assignment as a Mathematics
            Specialist/Consultant in Grades PK-8 in Rhode Island Public Schools.

      2.    Requirements:

            a.     Holds certification as a Rhode Island teacher;

            b.     Has three (3) years of teaching experience;

            c.     Has completed an approved program in this certification area;

            d.     Holds an advanced degree from a regionally accredited institution;
126
            e.     Has completed a minimum of three hundred (300) hours of
                   internship in this area;

            f.     Has demonstrated field competencies as prescribed by the RIDE-
                   approved national professional association; and

            g.     Has met all knowledge of field testing requirements for this
                   certification area.

B.    Reading Specialist/Consultant

      1.    Validity of Certificate:

            This certificate is valid for assignment as a Reading Specialist/Consultant
            in Grades PK-12 in Rhode Island Public Schools.

      2.    Requirements:

            a.     Holds certification as a Rhode Island teacher;

            b.     Has three (3) years of teaching experience;

            c.     Has completed an approved program in this certification area;

            d.     Holds an advanced degree from a regionally accredited institution;

            e.     Has completed a minimum of three hundred (300) hours of
                   internship in this area;

            f.     Has demonstrated field competencies as prescribed by the RIDE-
                   approved national professional association ; and

            g.     Has met all knowledge of field testing requirements for this
                   certification area.

1.12 Substitute Teachers and Athletic Coaches
A.    The following requirements apply to substitute teachers and athletic coaches.

      1.    Athletic Coach

            a.     Successfully complete a First Aid and Cardiopulmonary
                   Resuscitation (CPR) course prior to employment as a coach; and

            b.     Meet all additional requirements of the Rhode Island Interscholastic
                   League.

      2.    Day to Day Substitute Teacher


127
            a.     An individual who is employed, on a temporary basis, for fewer than
                   forty-five (45) days in the same assignment.

            b.     Individuals must hold:

                   (1)    A bachelor’s degree or higher from a regionally accredited
                          college or university; or

                   (2)    An associate's degree from a regionally accredited college or
                          university; or

                   (3)    A minimum of two (2) years college completion on track to a
                          four (4) year degree.

            c.     Substitutes for School Nurse Teacher must hold a license as a
                   Registered Nurse.

      3.    Substitute Teacher-Long-term

            a.     An individual who is employed, on a temporary basis, for more than
                   forty-five (45) consecutive days in the same assignment must hold
                   an appropriate Rhode Island certificate for the assignment.

1.13 Adding New Certificate Areas
A.    The addition of new certification areas requires educators to complete approved
      programs of study that are based on the new knowledge and skills to meet the
      requirements of these Regulations for the new area of certification. Preparation
      programs shall tailor program expectations to acknowledge the commonalities
      across related certification areas and only require that the candidates develop
      and demonstrate the additional knowledge and skills required for the new
      certification area. In certification areas for which there is no approved Rhode
      Island educator preparation program, RIDE will review an applicant’s preparation
      and readiness for certification through the credential review process; or

B.    Educators who hold Elementary Education Teacher certification and have four
      (4) years of teaching experience can add certification in Early Childhood by
      passing all content testing requirements for this certification area;

C.    Educators who hold All Grades Teacher certification and have four (4)three (3)
      years of teaching experience in grades PK through 3 can add certification in
      Early Childhood by passing all content testing requirements for this certification
      area and completing twelve (12) credits in early childhood education to include
      the teaching of English Language Arts, the teaching of Mathematics, Early
      Childhood Development, and Early Childhood Special Education.

D.    Educators who hold Early Childhood Teacher certification and have four (4)
      years of teaching experience can add certification in Elementary Grades by
      passing all content testing requirements for this certification;
128
E.    Educators who hold Middle Grades Teacher certification and have four (4) years
      of teaching experience in grades 5 and 6 can add certification in Elementary
      Grades by passing all content testing requirements for this certification area;

F.    Educators who hold All Grades Teacher certification and four (4) years of
      teaching experience in grades K through 6 can add certification in Elementary
      Grades by passing all content testing requirements of the certification area and
      completing twelve (12) credits in the teaching of: English Language Arts,
      Mathematics, Science, and Social Studies;

G.    Educators who hold Elementary Education Teacher certification and have three
      four (4) of teaching experience in grades 5 and 6 can add certification in Middle
      Grades by passing all content testing requirements for this certification area;

H.    Educators who hold Secondary Grades Teacher certification and have four (4)
      years of teaching experience can add certification in Middle Grades by passing
      all content testing requirements for this certification area;

I.    Educations who hold Middle Grades certification in one (1) area and have four
      (4) years of teaching experience can add certification in another Middle Grades
      area by passing all content testing requirements for this certification area;

J.    Educators who hold All Grades Teacher certification and four (4) years of
      teaching experience in grades 5 through 8 can add certification in Middle Grades
      by passing all content testing requirements in the certification area;

K.    Educators who hold Middle Grades Teacher certification and have four (4) years
      of teaching experience can add certification in Secondary Grades by passing all
      content testing requirements for this certification area;

L.    Educators who hold Secondary certification in one (1) area and have four (4)
      years of teaching experience can add certification in another Secondary area by
      passing all content testing requirements for this certification area;

M.    Educators who hold All Grades Teacher certification and four (4) years of
      teaching experience in grades 6 through 12 can add certification in Secondary
      Grades by passing all content testing requirements in the certification area;

N.    Educators who hold All Grades Teacher certification in one (1) area and have
      four (4) years of teaching experience can add certification in another All Grades
      area by passing all content testing requirements for this certification area;

O.    For Educators who obtain certification through testing options, local education
      agencies should work with the educator to tailor their Professional Learning Units
      (PLUs) to learn about new grade bands and/or content area.

1.14 Reinstatement
A.    Certificates can be reinstated for two (2) reasons:
129
      1.    Reinstatement for certificate expiration ; and

      2.    Reinstatement due to active duty while in the United States Military shall
            renew their certifications as outlined in R.I. Gen. Laws § 30-20-1.

B.    Reinstatement for Certificate Expiration

      1.    An educator who has met all requirements for certificate renewal, but did
            not renew the certificate(s) prior to its expiration date is eligible to reinstate
            the certificate(s) for up to three (3) years without completing any additional
            requirements. A reinstatement fee will be applied to the application.

      2.    If three (3) years up to ten (10) years has elapsed since the expiration of
            the certificate(s), the educator must take and pass current Rhode Island
            certificate assessments, if not previously passed, to ensure currency in the
            field, or provide evidence of successful teaching during work experience
            since the expiration of the certificate. A reinstatement fee will be applied to
            the application.

      3.    If more than ten (10) years has elapsed since the expiration of the
            certificate(s), the educator must reapply for and meet requirements for an
            initial certificate, including meeting all competency and assessment
            requirements as part of an approved program or credential review.

            a.     If an educator held a valid out-of-state certificate for three (3) out of
                   the most recent five (5) years, the educator may provide evidence
                   of successful teaching during work experience since the expiration
                   of the certificate. A reinstatement fee will be applied to the
                   application.

      4.    Requirements for reinstatement:

            a.     Complete a reinstatement application;

            b.     Submit all documentation necessary to demonstrate conditions for
                   reinstatement have been met; and

            c.     Submit a reinstatement application, reinstatement fee, and the
                   appropriate certificate fees.

            d.     RIDE will review the request for reinstatement and will make a
                   determination based upon the evidence submitted.

1.15 Appeals
A.    All decisions regarding certification under this Part may be appealed to the
      Director of the Office of Educator Excellence and Certification Services.
      Decisions of the Director may be appealed to the Commissioner of Education for
      hearing pursuant to R.I. Gen. Laws § 16-39-1.
130
1.16 Ongoing Review of Certification Regulations
A.    RIDE will review application processes, certification requirements, certification
      routes, types, and areas, and certification policy on a periodic basis and bring
      recommendations for changes to the Council to assure that this Part remains
      current and continues to respond to the changing needs of Rhode Island Schools
      and School Districts.




131
