English Learner (EL)
Administrator and Teacher Guide

Carey M. Wright, Ed. D., State Superintendent of Education
Kim S. Benton, Ed. D., Chief Academic Officer
OFFICE OF ELEMENTARY EDUCATION AND READING
Student Intervention Services Pre-K - 12
Published 2016
English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

1

MISSISSIPPI DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION
CAREY M. WRIGHT, ED. D., STATE SUPERINTENDENT OF EDUCATION
The Mississippi State Board of Education, the Mississippi Department of Education, the
Mississippi School for the Arts, the Mississippi School for the Blind, the Mississippi
School for the Deaf, and the Mississippi School for Mathematics and Science do not
discriminate on the basis of race, sex, color, religion, national origin, age, or disability in
the provision of educational programs and services or employment opportunities and
benefits. The following office has been designated to handle inquiries and complaints
regarding the non-discrimination policies of the above mentioned entities: Director,
Office of Human Resources, Mississippi Department of Education, 359 North West
Street, P. O. Box 771, Suite 203, Jackson, MS 39205-0771, (601)359-3511.

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

2

INTRODUCTION
Mississippi’s English Learner (EL) population has been expanding for a number of
years. A significant increase was noted during late 2015 and early 2016. From the end of
May 2015 to late January 2016, approximately 4,000 EL students were added to the
state’s population. This represents about a 34 percent increase. Statewide, almost all
Mississippi districts now have at least one EL student, and more than 12,100 EL
students have been identified across the Magnolia State.
With this shift in Mississippi’s population, it is more important than ever to provide
supports to teachers, administrators and other educators responsible for serving ELs.
This is a shared responsibility, with administrators, regular classroom teachers, EL
teachers, EL tutors, and other staff all working together to ensure success. General
education and EL teachers should collaborate together to determine appropriate
instructional strategies and accommodations for EL students. Using this model, all
educators function as language teachers when ELs are enrolled in their classes.
While English is designated as the official language of the state of Mississippi, and the
state Kindergarten Readiness Assessment,
Third Grade Summative Assessment, high
school graduation test and high school End of
Course Tests are all in English, it is our
responsibility as a state to successfully
prepare ELs to access all available
postsecondary options. This ambitious goal
requires that instructional approaches be
effective, innovative and flexible, with the
unique needs of EL students and families
always being considered. Ultimately, our responsibility is to ensure that ELs succeed
socially as well as academically. It is essential, for this reason, that ELs understand
American culture and how to function successfully within it. To accomplish these goals,
it may be necessary at times to provide some support in students’ native languages. This
means of support is appropriate, and is a research-based accommodation.
The purpose of the EL Resource Manual is to provide assistance with program
management and effective instruction of ELs. The intent of this document is to provide
instructional strategies, resources for teachers, assessment and supplementary
assessment choices, and sample portfolio guidelines.
Our hope is that this guide will serve as a valuable resource for Mississippi educators, as
we strive to ensure that all of our EL students across the state receive the education they
both need and deserve. Please remember that the Mississippi Department of Education
is here to serve and support you with this effort.

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

3

The EL Administrator and Teacher Guide is organized according to the
following sections:

SECTION I: Federal Guidelines and Guidance – Includes an
overview of federal guidelines for serving EL students.

SECTION II: Instructional Resources – Includes EL instructional
strategies, an early childhood checklist and a compilation of resources
to support effective classroom instruction.

SECTION III: Assessment of ALL EL Standards – Provides an
overview of the LAS Links assessment, as well as language proficiency
descriptors and strategies for each proficiency level. Additional
assessment tools, techniques teachers can use to respond to ELs’ writing
assignments, along with a sample analytic oral scoring rubric are also
provided.

SECTION IV: Student Portfolios – Features elementary, middle, and
high school reading/writing portfolio cover sheets and evaluation
summaries. Additionally, samples for language, speaking, and content
area progress documents along with self assessment forms for language
and speaking documents are included.

SECTION V: Appendix – Contains sample assessments and lesson
plans for EL students.

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

4

TABLE OF CONTENTS
SECTION I: FEDERAL GUIDELINES AND GUIDANCE ............................................................................. 6
Federal Guideline Information ..................................................................................................... 7
Guidance on Special Education Services for EL Students .......................................................... 11
SECTION II: INSTRUCTIONAL RESOURCES ..........................................................................................12
EL Instructional Strategies ..........................................................................................................13
Early Childhood Checklist for Teachers ...................................................................................... 15
Resources for Teachers ............................................................................................................... 18
EL Reading Rubric vs. Developmental Reading Rubric ............................................................ 23
Online Articles and Resources Specific to Teaching EL Students ............................................. 25
SECTION III: ASSESSMENT OF ALL EL STANDARDS ........................................................................... 26
LAS Links Assessment Overview ................................................................................................ 27
LAS Links Proficiency Level Descriptors for Grades K-5 .......................................................... 27
Expectations and Strategies by Proficiency Level ...................................................................... 32
Factors Affecting Rate and Ease of Language Development ..................................................... 34
Supplementary Assessment Choices for ELs ............................................................................. 36
Techniques for Responding to EL Student Writing Samples .................................................... 37
Analytic Oral Language Scoring Rubric ..................................................................................... 39
SECTION IV: STUDENT PORTFOLIOS ................................................................................................. 41
Elementary School Reading/Writing Portfolio Cover Sheet ..................................................... 42
Middle School Reading/Writing Portfolio Cover Sheet ............................................................. 43
High School Reading/Writing Portfolio Cover Sheet ................................................................ 44
Portfolio Evaluation Summary ................................................................................................... 45
Summary Evaluation Guidelines ................................................................................................ 46
Content Area Progress ................................................................................................................ 47
Self-Assessment of Academic Language Functions ................................................................... 48
Language and Academic Progress .............................................................................................. 49
Self-Assessment of Oral Language ............................................................................................. 50
Self-Assessment of Speaking Ability ........................................................................................... 51
Oral Scoring Rubric .................................................................................................................... 52
Math Development Checklist ..................................................................................................... 53
SECTION V: APPENDIX ..................................................................................................................... 54
English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

5

SECTION I:
Federal Guidelines and Guidance

This section includes the following information:
1. Federal Guideline Information
2. Guidance on Special Education Services for EL students

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

6

Federal Guideline Information
Compliance Considerations
Forty years ago, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in the Lau v. Nichols case that for schools
to meet their legal obligations under Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, they had to
take steps to ensure that students with Limited English Proficiency (LEP) could
meaningfully participate in schools’ education programs and services. The same year,
Congress enacted the Equal Educational Opportunities Act, which reaffirmed that public
schools and state educational agencies are required to overcome students’ language
barriers and to equip them to participate equally and meaningfully in school programs.
Nationwide and in Mississippi, the number of EL students is growing. Nationally, EL
students are now enrolled in almost three out of every four public schools and account
for 9 percent of all public school students.
In a January 2015 Dear Colleague Letter, English Learner Students and Limited
English Proficient Parents, several requirements were reiterated as part of an effort to
ensure that all EL students have “access to equal educational opportunities.”

Guidelines for Schools
1. Identify and Serve All Potential EL Students
The first step in serving EL students effectively is to have a clear identification
process. Most school districts do this through a home language survey given to
families when a student enters school. The survey typically asks what languages are
spoken in the home, what languages are spoken most often by the student, and what
languages the student is able to read. School districts “must to the extent practicable
translate such notices in a language the parent can understand.” If translation is not
feasible, parents must be offered free oral interpretation of the written survey
information.
It is essential to note that all ELs must be allowed to attend school, even if they are
unable to present a birth certificate, social security number or immigration
documentation. If immunization records are not available from a previous school or
doctor, students can begin the immunization series at the local public health
department.
2. Assessing Potential EL Students
Federal guidelines require that all potential EL students be assessed in all four
domains of English – speaking, listening, reading and writing. In Mississippi, that
assessment is done using LAS Links, a fully online assessment system. Parents
English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

7

should be notified of results and program placement in a language they can
understand. Students who start school during the first month of the academic year
have up to 30 days to be screened, while students who start after the first month of
school have two weeks to be screened and placed. More information on assessing
ELs is available in the section on the LAS Links assessment, found on page 27.
3. Providing EL Students with a Language Assistance Program
Students must receive language assistance services or programs that have been
demonstrated “educationally sound in theory and effective in practice.” No particular
program or method of instruction is required for EL students. Some Mississippi
districts have EL teachers working in pull-out programs, where EL students are
pulled from general education classrooms for intensive language instruction and
support. In other cases, EL teachers or tutors might use a push-in model, where they
provide support to students within the general education classroom, in conjunction
with the general education teacher.
Some EL program models that have been implemented nationally include:
• English as a Second Language/English Language Development –
programs designed to teach EL students explicitly about the English language,
including the academic vocabulary needed to access content and to develop
English language proficiency. Instruction is usually in English with little to no
use of the student’s primary language.
• Transitional Bilingual Education – uses a student’s primary language for
instruction. Students maintain and develop skills in their native language, while
English is introduced, maintained and developed.
• Dual Language Program – is a bilingual program where some students are
native English speakers and some are ELs. The two groups are both maintaining
their existing language, while learning a new one.
4. Providing Meaningful Access to All Programs
While they are receiving support in developing their English proficiency, EL students
also must have access to the core academic curriculum of their peers. This means
they should be receiving supports in the regular classroom to ensure that they are
able to understand and build academic content. Schools also must ensure that EL
students have equal access to athletics, clubs, the arts, gifted and talented programs,
and other activities. Additionally, EL students must have access to the same
facilities, including science and computer labs and other facilities.
Once a student has been identified as EL, they must have an English Language
Service Plan (LSP), which should be filed and updated annually until the student
exits EL status. The plan should be developed and updated through the Student
Evaluation Team (SET), a school team responsible for guiding and monitoring
English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

8

placement, services and assessment of EL students. The committee must include, at
the minimum, an ESL teacher, a general education teacher, a school administrator,
and a parent representative. The team should meet at least quarterly.
5. Serving Students Who Opt Out of EL Services
Parents have a legal right to opt their children out of an EL program or a specific EL
service. However, school representatives can in no way encourage families to opt out.
Schools also must provide guidance that parents can understand about the EL
services their child could receive, and the potential benefits of such services. Districts
must document all opt-outs, and letters verifying that parents opted out of services
must be kept on file.
Even if students opt out of the EL program, districts are still responsible for
monitoring them. Students who have opted out remain designated as EL students
and schools must appropriately serve them, including with interventions in the
regular education classroom. The progress of students who opt out also should
continue to be monitored and students must still take annual English proficiency
assessments.
6. Monitoring and Exiting EL Students
All EL students, including those who have opted out of specific EL services, must be
monitored for progress. In Mississippi, monitoring occurs through both the annual
LAS Links assessment and when students take mandated state assessments required
of all students. EL students who have been in U.S. schools two years or more are
expected to take and pass required state assessments. Assessment results need to
inform instruction, and ELs who are not progressing should receive additional
supports and services, which should then be documented in the Language
Service Plan.
To exit EL status, students must post scores of either proficient or advanced
proficient for each of the four LAS Links domains (reading, writing, listening and
speaking), or have a composite score of proficient when the four domain scores are
averaged from one test administration. At the same time, students also must
demonstrate proficiency in academic content areas. This should be done by posting
proficient scores on the Mississippi Assessment Program (MAP), the statewide
exams for students in grades 3-8 and in end-of-course assessments. Once a student
has been exited from EL status, progress should continue to be monitored for two
years. If academic deficits surface after the student has been exited, additional
supports should again be provided. The student also should be re-tested using LAS
Links, and if the student does not score proficient, they need to again be designated
as EL.

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

9

7. Meaningful Communication with Parents
Teachers and administrators must ensure they are communicating with EL parents
in a way they can comprehend. Parents must be adequately notified in a language
they understand about any programs, services or activities within the district. They
should also receive information on language assistance programs, special education
and related services, IEP meetings, grievance procedures, notices of
nondiscrimination, student discipline procedures and actions, registration and
enrollment, report cards, permission slips, parent-teacher conferences and parent
handbooks. Information included in students’ Language Service Plans also must be
shared with parents.
School districts should identify EL parents, and be mindful that some students might
speak English fluently but have parents who require translated materials.
The school should provide translated materials for any languages that are common
in the local community. For less common languages, schools may use a cover page
explaining in those languages how a parent might receive oral interpretation. When
using translators, care should be taken to ensure that the translator has a strong
grasp of English, and is able to translate potentially complex education information.
Translators and interpreters should be aware of confidentiality requirements.
In Mississippi, districts also have free access to TransACT, a company that provides a
menu of legally reviewed forms and notices in multiple languages. Any Mississippi
public school employee with a district email address can create a TransACT account.
Go to www.transact.com to create an account.
For more information on district and state requirements for EL students, go to
http://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/ocr/letters/colleague-el-201501.pdf

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

10

Guidance on Special Education Services for EL Students
Federal law requires that districts ensure that all EL students who have a disability
under either IDEA or Section 504 receive appropriate services for their disability, while
also still receiving the supports they need and are entitled to as EL students.
When evaluating students for possible disabilities, districts need to consider the English
proficiency of students, and then determine which assessments and materials are most
appropriate. Districts must not identify EL students as having disabilities simply
because they have limited English proficiency.
Districts are responsible for ensuring that disabilities assessments and other evaluations
materials be provided in the child’s native language or through another form of
communication that is likely to yield an accurate evaluation of the student’s abilities.
Even students whose parents have opted out of EL services must be given language
appropriate assessments.
Once an EL student has been identified as having a qualifying disability, the district is
responsible, through the IEP process, for identifying how to best serve the child. Both
the child’s disability and their language proficiency needs should be considered as part
of this process. Additionally, the IEP team should include individuals who understand
the language acquisition process and are able to add insights into the child’s language
needs. Language services must continue to be documented through the Language
Service Plan. Parents with limited English proficiency should be provided with
information about assessments, special education services and the IEP process in their
native language.

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

11

SECTION II:
Instructional Resources

This section includes the following information:
1. EL Instructional Strategies
2. Early Childhood Checklist for Teachers
3. Resources
a) Academic Language and English Learners
b) English Learners with Learning Disabilities (ELLD)
c) Strategies for Teaching English Learners
d) High School English Learners and Mathematics
e) Graphic Organizers for Content Instruction
f) Let’s Read It Again: Comprehension Strategies for English
Learners
g) Acrostic Poems
h) Understanding the “Silent Period” with English Learners
4. EL Reading Rubric vs. Developmental Reading Rubric
5. Website links to Articles and Resources
English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

12

EL Instructional Strategies
The following instructional strategies are designed to support ELs’ content learning,
provide a variety of approaches for completing assignments, and assist with building
confidence for the EL student.

EL Instructional Strategies
Methodologies/
Approaches

Visuals

Total Physical Response (TPR)
Natural Approach
Cognitive Academic Language Learning Approach (CALLA)
Whole Language Approach
Language Experience Approach (LEA)
Retelling a Story
Activating Prior Knowledge
Graphic Organizers
Flow Charts
Maps
Charts
Graphs
Pictures
Semantic Webbing/
Mapping
T-Charts
Venn Diagrams
Story Maps
Timelines

Interactive
Strategies

Cooperative Learning
Peer Buddy
Small Group Activities
Pairs and Threes
Jigsaw
“Corners”
Think/Pair/Share
Group Reports, Projects
Panel Discussions/Debate
Choral Reading/ Read
Around Groups

Audio/Visual
Videos/Films/CD ROM
Demonstrations
Captioning
Labeling
Music/Songs
Jazz Chants/Raps
CDs – Music/Books
Computer/Software

Other
Field Trips
K-W-L (Know/Wants to
Know/Learned)
Role Play
Games
Dialogue Journals

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

13

Modified Class
Work
(Based on Level
of English
Proficiency)

Vary Complexity of Assignment
One-on-One Instruction with Teacher or Aide
Modify Nature of Assignment
Substitute Diagram for Paragraph
Use of Home Language for Instruction
Explain Key Concepts
Repeat/Paraphrase/Slow Down
Vocabulary with Context Clues
Reading with a Specific Purpose
Use Simple, Direct Language (Limit Idioms)
Use all Modalities/Learning Styles
Provide Meaningful Language Practice
Drills (Substitution, Expansion, Paraphrase, Repetition)
Matching with Visuals
Unscramble Sentences, Words, Visuals
Categorize Vocabulary
Context Clues
Outline Notes
Directed Reading/Thinking Activity (DRTA)
Semantic Feature Analysis
SQ3R (Survey, Question, Read, Recite, Review)
Summarizing
Notetaking
Wordbanks
Repetition
Question-Answer Relationship (QAR)
Personal Dictionaries

Alternative
Assessment
Instruments

Interview
Content Retelling
Content Dictation
Cloze Procedure
Graphic Representation
Student Self-rating and Evaluation
Teacher Rating Checklist
Writing Sample
Group Testing
Observation/Anecdotal
Portfolio

Multicultural
Resources

Guest Speakers
Use of Community Resources
Cultural Sharing
Varied Holiday Activities
Diverse Literature

Modified version of the Multicultural/Foreign Language/ESOL Education Department – ESOL Instructional Strategies Matrix

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

14

Early Childhood Checklist for Teachers
This checklist is intended to improve the awareness and sensitivity of personnel to the
importance of cultural diversity, cultural competence, and linguistic competence in early
childhood settings. It provides concrete examples of the types of practices that foster
such an environment. If, upon the completion of the checklist, you find you frequently
responded “C,” you may not be utilizing practices that promote a culturally diverse and
culturally competent learning environment for your students or their families. If you
find a pattern of mostly B’s and C’s, you may want to adjust your practices. It is
important to make sure you are considering all aspects of your students’ educations,
including awareness and representation of their cultural backgrounds. The following
checklist can be used to ensure that you are providing students with the best possible
education.
Please select A, B, or C for each item listed below.
A = Things I do frequently
B = Things I do occasionally
C = Things I do rarely or never
___ 1. I display pictures, posters, and other materials that reflect the cultures and
ethnic backgrounds of children and families served in my early childhood
program or setting.
___ 2. I select props for the dramatic play/housekeeping area that are culturally
diverse (e.g., dolls, clothing, cooking utensils, household articles, furniture).
___ 3. I ensure that the book/literacy area has pictures and storybooks that reflect the
different cultures of children and families served in my school or setting.
___ 4. I ensure that tabletop toys and other play accessories (that depict people) are
representative of the various cultural and ethnic groups both within my
community and society in general.
___ 5. I read a variety of books exposing children in my early childhood program or
setting to various life experiences of cultures and ethnic groups other than their
own.
___ 6. When such books are not available, I provide opportunities for children and
their families to create their own books and include them among the resources
and materials in my early childhood program or setting.
___ 7. I adapt the above referenced approaches when providing services, supports,
and other interventions in the home setting.

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

15

___ 8. I encourage and provide opportunities for children and their families to share
experiences through storytelling, puppets, marionettes, or other props to
support the “oral tradition” common among many cultures.
___ 9. I plan trips and community outings to places where children and their families
can learn about their own cultural or ethnic history as well as the history of
others.
___ 10. I select videos, films, or other media resources reflective of diverse cultures to
share with children and families served in my early childhood program or
setting.
___ 11. I play a variety of music and introduce musical instruments from many
cultures.
___ 12. I provide opportunities for children to cook or sample a variety of foods
typically served by different cultural and ethnic groups other than their own.
___ 13. If my early childhood program or setting consists entirely of children and
families from the same cultural or ethnic group, I feel it is important to plan an
environment and implement activities that reflect the cultural diversity within
the society at large.
___ 14. I am cognizant of and ensure that curricula I use include traditional holidays
celebrated by the majority culture, as well as those holidays that are unique to
the culturally diverse children and families served in my early childhood
program or setting.
___ 15. For children who speak languages or dialects other than English, I attempt to
learn and use key words in their language so that I am better able to
communicate with them.
___ 16. I attempt to determine any familiar colloquialisms used by children and
families that will assist and/or enhance the delivery of services and supports.
___ 17. I use visual aids, gestures, and physical prompts in my interactions with
children who have limited English proficiency.
___ 18. When interacting with parents and other family members who have limited
English proficiency, I always keep in mind that:
___ (a) limitation in English proficiency is in no way a reflection of their level
of intellectual functioning;
___ (b) their limited ability to speak the language of the dominant culture has
no bearing on their ability to communicate effectively in their
language of origin;
English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

16

___ (c) they may neither be literate in their language of origin nor English.
___ 19. I avoid imposing values that may conflict or be inconsistent with those of
cultures or ethnic groups other than my own.
___ 20. I discourage children from using racial and ethnic slurs by helping them
understand that certain words can hurt others.
___ 21. I screen books, movies, and other media resources for negative cultural, ethnic,
racial, or religious stereotypes before sharing them with children and their
families served in my early childhood program or setting.
___ 22. I provide activities to help children learn about and accept the differences and
similarities in all people as an ongoing component of program curricula.

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

17

Resources for Teachers
The following compilation of resources is provided to assist classroom teachers with
effective instruction and assessment, differentiation, parent engagement activities, and
available content area graphic organizers designed to aid in the comprehension and
proficiency of English Learners.

Academic Language and English Learners
Teachers who work with ELs will find English as a Second Language (ESL), English
for Speaking of Other Language (ESOL), English Learner (EL), English as a Foreign
Language (EFL) reading/writing skill building activities and ideas to help PreK-3, 48, and 9-12 students with acquiring Academic Language. ¡Colorín Colorado! offers a
webcast on Academic Language and English Learners. The webcast features Dr.
Robin Scarcella of the University of California at Irvine. Dr. Scarcella provides an
overview of academic language instruction for English Learners, as well as teaching
strategies, activity ideas, and recommended resources.
http://www.colorincolorado.org/webcasts/academiclanguage/

English Learners with Learning Disabilities (ELLD)
Do you know how to tell the difference in an EL student with a learning disability or
an EL having difficulties in learning academic language? Many times it is difficult to
identify the difference because the student is being quiet or we think the student is
nonverbal. In this webcast from ¡Colorín Colorado!, Dr. Elsa Cárdenas-Hagan
discusses effective assessment and instructional strategies for English Learners with
disabilities. Dr. Cárdenas-Hagan is a bilingual speech-language pathologist. This
webcast discusses effective assessment and instructional strategies for English
Learners with learning disabilities, as well as ways to help encourage the active
involvement of parents of ELs with learning disabilities in their children’s schools.
http://www.colorincolorado.org/webcasts/disabilities/

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

18

Strategies for Teaching English Learners
If you are like many teachers, your classroom is becoming more linguistically
diverse. While this diversity occurs, teachers are asking, “How can I assist this
student to learn English and become proficient?” Scholastic has an article that
includes advice from veteran teachers on how to most effectively serve English
Learners.
http://www.scholastic.com/teachers/article/strategies-teaching-english-languagelearners
High School English Learners and Mathematics
WIDA has a blog titled “Using the Can Do Descriptors in a High School Math Class,”
which provides strategies mainstream and EL teachers can use to instruct high
school students in math. The blog highlights how to differentiate classroom
instruction or classroom assessment according to the student’s language proficiency
level. (NOTE: Any Reference to WIDA is for resource purposes only. LAS
Links is the new diagnostic assessment administered to EL students
upon enrollment in a Mississippi public school.)
http://www.widaatwcer.blogspot.com/2012/05/using-can-do-descriptors-in-highschool.html
Graphic Organizers for Content Instruction
Graphic organizers make content area information more accessible to English
Learners by converting complex information into manageable chunks. One of the
roles of EL and bilingual specialists is to encourage mainstream teachers to employ
teaching techniques which make content area information more accessible to second
language learners. Content materials present text which is too dense for ELs. You
might teach your students to use graphic organizers such as webs, Venn diagrams,
and charts to help them better comprehend texts. The link provides various

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

19

downloadable activities that can be used in the classroom.
http://www.everythingesl.net/inservices/graphic_organizers.php
Let’s Read It Again: Comprehension Strategies for English-Language
One of the most effective ways to engage ELs and help them comprehend and read
English is through repeated readings and retellings of appealing bilingual picture
books. Using Con Mi Hermano/With My Brother by Eileen Roe, second grade
Spanish-speaking ELs identify the main idea of the story, construct meaning from
text and illustrations, and learn English words. Students then demonstrate their
knowledge and practice writing in English by writing a poem and a retelling of the
story. This lesson (which can be adapted using bilingual books in other languages
and for older students) also has older struggling readers read with younger students.
Finally, English-speaking students in regular classrooms learn Spanish words for
familiar people and objects. The following link from ReadWriteThink is a good
resource for lesson planning and activities. This is a K-2 activity with an estimated
time of five 30-minute sessions.
http://www.readwritethink.org/classroom-resources/lesson-plans/read-againcomprehension-strategies-1045.html
Acrostic Poems
In this online interactive writing poetry activity from ReadWriteThink, students can
learn about and write acrostic poems. An acrostic poem uses the letters in a word to
begin each line of a poem. All lines of the poem relate to or describe the main topic
word. As part of the online tool, students brainstorm words to prepare themselves to
write their poems and can save their work in progress to revise and edit, reinforcing
elements of the writing process. Students can also print their finished acrostic
poems or proudly show off their work by emailing it to a friend or family member.
http://www.readwritethink.org/classroom-resources/student-interactives/acrosticpoems-30045.html.

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

20

Understanding the “Silent Period” with English Learners
If you have a new EL in your class who is not speaking, do not assume that they are
not learning. According to language researcher Stephen Krashen, most new learners
of English will go through a “silent period,” where they are unwilling or unable to
communicate orally, even though they understand much of what is going on around
them. They are not comfortable speaking in the new language, because it is difficult
for them to express their thoughts orally. Children in this silent period should not be
forced to speak before they are ready. They need time to listen to others talk, digest
what they hear, and observe their fellow classmates’ interactions with each other.
Their silence does not mean they are not learning the language. The following link
from Choice Literacy has a helpful article by Andie Cunningham and Ruth Shagoury
to assist teachers with understanding non-verbal English Learners.
https://www.choiceliteracy.com/articles-detail-view.php?id=47.

LAS Links Frequently Asked Questions
The Office of Student Assessment provides an overview of answers to commonly
asked questions about Mississippi’s new LAS Links assessment.
https://districtaccess.mde.k12.ms.us/studentassessment/Public
Access/Special_Populations/English Learners/ELPT LAS Links Assessment System
Q-A - December 2015.pdf

Bilingual Dictionaries Listing
The Mississippi Office of Student Assessment provides a list of recommended
bilingual word-to-word and technical dictionaries for use with EL students.
https://districtaccess.mde.k12.ms.us/studentassessment/Public%20Access/Special
_Populations/English%20Learners/Suggested%20List%20of%20Bilingual%20Dicti
onaries%20for%20ELL%20Students.pdf

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

21

U.S. Department of Education EL Tool Kit
In 2015, the U.S. Department of Education’s Office of English Language Acquisition
released the English Learner Tool Kit, a 10-chapter resource that contains an
overview of EL policies and needs, sample tools, and EL resources.
http://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/oela/english-learner-toolkit/index.html

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

22

EL Reading Rubric vs. Developmental Reading Rubric
It is important to recognize the similarities and differences between EL students and
native English-speaking students’ development in reading. The following chart is
designed to help teachers recognize whether or not an EL student needs continued
language support.

EL

Developmental

Pre-Reader

• Listens to read-alouds
• Repeats words and phrases
• Uses pictures to comprehend
text
• May recognize some
sound/symbol relationship

• Pretends to read
• Uses illustrations to tell a story
• Participates in reading of familiar
books
• Knows some letter sounds
• Recognizes names/words in context
• Memorizes pattern books and
familiar books
• Rhymes and plays with words

Emerging
Reader

• Participates in choral reading
• Begins to retell familiar,
predictable text
• Uses visuals to facilitate
meaning
• Uses phonics and word
structure to decode

• Sees self as reader
• Reads books with word patterns
• Knows most letter sounds
• Retells main idea of text
• Recognizes simple words
• Relies on print and illustrations

Developing
Reader

• Begins to make predictions
• Retells beginning, middle, and
end of story
• Recognizes plot, characters,
and events
• Begins to rely more on print
than illustrations
• May need assistance in
choosing appropriate texts

• Relies more on print than
illustrations
• Recognizes names/words by sight
• Uses sentence structure clues
• Uses phonetic clues
• Retells beginning, middle, and end
• Begins to read silently
• Uses basic punctuation

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

23

Expanding
Reader

• Begins to read independently
• Responds to literature
• Begins to use a variety of
reading strategies
• Usually chooses appropriate
texts

• Begins to read short stories and
books
• Reads and finishes a variety of
materials with guidance
• Uses reading strategies
• Retells plot, characters, and events
• Recognizes different types of books
• Reads silently for short periods of
time

Proficient
Reader

• Reads independently
• Relates reading to personal
experience
• Uses a wide variety of reading
strategies
• Usually chooses appropriate
texts

• Begins to read chapter books of
moderate difficulty
• Reads and finishes a variety of
materials with guidance
• Reads and understands most new
words
• Uses reference materials to locate
information with guidance
• Increases knowledge of literary
elements and genres
• Reads silently for extended periods

Independent
Reader

• Reads for enjoyment
• Reads and completes a wide
variety of texts
• Responds personally and
critically to texts
• Matches a wide variety of
reading strategies to purpose
• Chooses appropriate or
challenging texts

• Reads most literature appropriate to
grade-level
• Selects, reads, and finishes a wide
variety of materials
• Uses reference materials
independently
• Recognizes and uses literary
elements and genres
• Begins to interpret and expand
meaning from literature
• Participates in literary discussions

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

24

Online Articles and Resources Specific to Teaching EL Students
The articles and resources below will provide guidance and support for EL teachers,
classroom teachers, RtI Team members, and the EL Team as they develop academic and
literacy language content for ELs.
Center for Applied Linguistics
Resource Center (Compilations of different briefs, databases, facts, publications, and
resource archive)
http://www.cal.org/resource-center
Colorin Colorado
“Identifying Language Proficiency for Program Placement”
http://www.colorincolorado.org/educators/assessment/identification/
Education World
“ESL Lessons on the Web”
http://www.educationworld.com/a_lesson/lesson/lesson224.shtml
“Express Yourself (Well) Web Sites for Teaching Students about the English
Language”
http://www.educationworld.com/a_curr/curr149.shtml
National Center for the Study of Adult Learning and Literacy
“Beginning ESOL Learners’ Advice to their Teachers”
http://www.ncsall.net/index.html@id=279.html
One Stop English
“ESOL Teaching Tips”
http://www.onestopenglish.com/esol/esol-support/teaching-tips/
Reading Rockets
“Extending English Learners’ Classroom Interactions Using the Response Protocol”
http://www.readingrockets.org/article/extending-english-language-learnersclassroom-interactions-using-response-protocol

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

25

SECTION III:
Assessment of All EL Standards

This section includes the following information:
1.

LAS Links Assessment Overview

2.

LAS Links Proficiency Descriptors for Grades K-5

3.

Expectations and Strategies by Proficiency Level

4.

Factors Affecting Rate and Ease of Language Development

5.

Supplementary Assessment Choices for ELs

6.

Techniques for Responding to EL Student Writing Samples

7.

Analytic Oral Language Scoring Rubric

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

26

LAS Links Assessment Overview
Mississippi started using the LAS Links assessment to identify and monitor the progress
of EL students during the 2015-16 school year. The web-based assessment includes tests
in listening, speaking, reading and writing, as required under federal guidelines.
Reading and writing selected-response items are scored automatically, providing
teachers with immediate data on students’ language proficiency.
Students receive different assessments, based on their grade level. LAS Links’ grade
bands are K-1, 2-3, 4-5, 6-8 and 9-12. The assessments are aligned to the Teachers of
English to Speakers of Other Languages (TESOL) PreK-12 English Language Proficiency
Standards. Your district test coordinator should have been provided with access to
download a copy of these standards and has been directed to distribute the standards to
all administrators and teachers who serve EL students. Contact your test coordinator or
appropriate school level administrator for more information. The standards also are
available for purchase here: https://www.tesol.org/advance-the-field/standards/prek12-english-language-proficiency-standards.
Data from the LAS Links assessment is used to assign the student a proficiency level,
ranging from beginning to early intermediate to intermediate. Higher performing
students are either proficient or above proficient.
Individual student proficiency and home/parent reports are available. A summary
report of strands provides teachers and administrators with group assessment data. The
Reading Links Report gives a list of recommended independent reading books, based on
the student’s reading level.

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

27

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

28

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

29

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

30

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

31

Expectations and Strategies by Proficiency Level

Above Proficient

The final stage for EL learners is above proficient. At this level, students’
communication and reading mirrors that of a native English speaker. At this
stage, students are able to read and comprehend grade-level text
independently. They are able to meet grade level expectations in writing, and
are likely ready to be exited from EL status. Students may still have an
accent at this stage and may occasionally struggle with idioms and other
figurative language, but are generally successful in their use of and
understanding of English and are basically similar to their native English
peers.

Proficient

A proficient student is able to understand and communicate about academic
content in fairly complex ways. They are able to read and understand text at
grade level, and are able to write more lengthy and complex pieces.
Grammar tends to be consistent and academic vocabulary is fairly strong,
with students feeling comfortable learning and expressing an understanding
of new concepts. In this stage, EL students still benefit from explanations of
figurative language and are capable of more nuanced understanding.
Occasionally, students may need explanations of particularly complex
grammatical constructs.

Intermediate

3

4

5

Examining the LAS Links proficiency levels for any grade band, expectations grow with
each proficiency level. EL students should be supported differently, based on their
proficiency level, and educators are likely to find that some strategies align better with
specific proficiency stages.

Once students move into the intermediate language proficiency level, they
are more consistently able to comprehend and communicate understanding
of academic content. Their vocabulary becomes more sophisticated and they
are able to shift verb tenses correctly. Compound sentences also are more
frequently used. Grammar is more consistent, although there are still errors.
At this level, there are still errors in both expression and comprehension.
Students functioning in this level benefit most from instruction in
explanations of figurative language, and still require a great deal of
repetition. Students in the intermediate stage also benefit most from support
and extensive instruction in the writing process. Intermediate level students
may still need a great deal of support to understand and express their
understanding of concepts that are new to them.

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

32

Early Intermediate
Beginning

2
1

In the early intermediate stage, students are beginning to make sense of and
use English. They are often able to communicate basic and familiar concepts
using simple sentences. Students in this stage still make significant errors in
basic communication and comprehension, and their ability to function both
socially and academically is still significantly impaired. They can read and
write short paragraphs on concepts that are familiar to them, and also hold
simple discussions. Students in this phase benefit from the teaching of and
modeling of the use of high-frequency and key words. Sentence and
paragraph frames are particularly helpful to students in this language
proficiency stage.
In the beginning stage, the student is just beginning to use and make sense
of the English language. Students in this stage still rely heavily on their
native language, and much of their comprehension may be demonstrated
either in the native language or nonverbally. Students in this stage need the
most support because their English proficiency is so low. Some students in
this stage may be in the silent phase, where they do not speak at all, only
speak in their native language, or only parrot back what is being said to
them. Students in this stage often comprehend far more than they can
express or demonstrate, and communicate most often through gesturing,
pointing or drawing. Students closer to entering the early intermediate stage
will likely use single words or basic, similarly structured phrases and
sentences, usually in present tense. Their grammar may be incorrect.

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

33

Factors Affecting Rate and Ease of Language Development
Some students might move through language acquisition stages more easily and with
less support than others. A variety of factors have been found to influence how easily a
student develops the ability to communicate in and comprehend English, both socially
and within academic settings. Some of the English language acquisition factors most
consistently identified by education researchers are outlined here.
Personality Traits of the Learner
EL students who are confident and particularly outgoing often are more comfortable
speaking a second language. This is because they tend to be less apprehensive about
making mistakes and being criticized by others, and are more willing to take language
risks. Students who are less extroverted may pick up reading and writing skills more
quickly, while still struggling with the spoken word. Students who are more selfmotivated also tend to fare better when learning English. One way motivation can be
bolstered is by helping students to see the benefits of learning a new language. Some
of these benefits, depending upon the age of the student, might include being able to
socialize more successfully, or being able to graduate and go to college or find a good
job. Teachers also can provide additional motivation to EL students by offering
prizes, extra privileges or praise, along with other incentives.
Environmental Factors
Some families place a high priority on students learning English. Students whose
families recognize they will likely be in the U.S. long-term tend to be more motivated
to use English than students from families who believe that they will eventually
return to their native countries. Those students who are exposed to effective EL
programs at school, and also hear English spoken outside of school, also tend to be
more successful. Students who communicate with native English speakers most often,
both in and out of school, also are typically more successful.
Chronological Age and Brain Development
Research seems to indicate that students between the ages of 2 and 12 are most
successful at mastering a new language, with children between the ages of 8 and 12
being particularly good at learning a new language because they have already had an
opportunity to master a first language. Once students have entered puberty, it is more
challenging for them to develop a new language because the brain is less adaptive.
This explains why people who learn a new language after they have started puberty
tend to keep their native accent.

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

34

Native Language Development
Students who have strong reading and communication skills in their native language
are almost always more successful in learning English than students who have weak
skills in their native language. Students who have received a strong, uninterrupted
education also tend to have more success than students who have had their education
disrupted. In some cases, students who have been exposed to several languages but
never developed fluency in one will struggle when striving to learn English. Cognitive
ability also is a factor, and some students are naturally more inclined to pick up a new
language with ease.
Similarity of the Native Language to English
Clearly, students from all language backgrounds are able to learn English. That said,
there are some native languages that are more similar to English, making the
transition from the native language to English easier. Students who already speak
Spanish, for example, are at an advantage when learning English because there are
many words that are similar from Spanish to English. Students transitioning from a
dramatically different alphabet, such as the Arabic alphabet, also might find reading
and writing in English more challenging.

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

35

Supplementary Assessment Choices for ELs
Supplementary assessments are an important means of collecting data relevant to the
students’ academic and linguistic development. Supplementary assessment refers to
procedures and techniques which can be used within the context of instruction and can
be easily incorporated into the daily activities of the school or classroom. Supplementary
assessments generally meet the following criteria:
•

Focus is on documenting individual student growth over time, rather than
comparing students with one another.

•

Emphasis is on students' strengths (what they know), rather than weaknesses
(what they don't know).

•

Consideration is given to the learning styles, language proficiencies, cultural and
educational backgrounds, and grade levels of students.

Supplementary assessment includes a variety of measures that can be adapted for
different situations. The following examples are particularly useful for assessing EL
students.

Supplementary Assessment Choices for English Learners
•

Audio and Video

•

Interview

•

Checklist

•

Journal

•

Cloze Procedure

•

Observation/Anecdotal

•

Content Dictation

•

Portfolio

•

Content Retelling

•

Role Play

•

Debate

•

Student Self-Rating and Evaluation

•

Games

•

Technology

•

Graphic Representation

•

Venn Diagram/Semantic Map

•

Group Testing

•

Writing Sample

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

36

Techniques for Responding to EL Student Writing Samples
The chart below provides writing response techniques, along with a description, for
evaluating student writing assignments.

Technique

Student SelfEvaluation
Student Editors (Peer
Conferences)

Student-Teacher FiveMinute Conferences

Student Publishing

General Impression
(Holistic Scoring)

Single Focus (Primary
Trait) Scoring

# of Items
Scored per
Paper

Description

None

Student chooses a goal (e.g., eliminating runon sentences) and evaluates his or her own
progress.

None

Students read or listen to each other’s
writing, making positive comments and
suggestions.

None

While the class writes, the teacher quickly
skims individual student’s work and makes
positive comments and suggestions. This will
allow the teacher to conference with every
student weekly or bi-weekly.

None

Students share their writing samples with
individuals other than the teacher, read their
writing samples aloud, mail or e-mail letters,
and display their work.

1

A single score of 0-4 or 0-6 is based on an
overall, or “whole” impression from a quick
read. Example: o - did not address the
assignment in any way (e.g., a short story
was assigned and the student wrote a
rhyme).
Example: 4 - addresses the assignment and
shows originality.

1-2

A single trait is commented on or scored 04 or 0-6. (e.g., Did the student name a
problem and suggest solutions?)
A related trait also may be considered.
Students focus on and improve one skill at a
time. (e.g., persuasiveness)

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

37

Focused Holistic
Scoring

Yes/No (Dichotomous
Scale Scoring)

Analytic Scoring

Traditional Grading

2-4

A cross between holistic and primary trait
scoring, which may be scored 0-4 or 0-6.
Both are combined to elicit an overall
(holistic) impression and one or several
specific traits (e.g., Were purpose and
audience addressed? Was the piece well
organized?)

4-10

A checklist of about 4-10 criteria is marked
yes or no (e.g., Was correct time order used?
Yes/No).

4-10

A list of about 4-10 traits (e.g., ideas,
organization, word choice, grammar,
spelling, mechanics) are commented on or
scored high, middle, or low.

Everything

All errors are marked. Students might select,
revise, and polish a favorite composition to
submit for traditional grading every month or
two.

Betty G. Gray, author, WORLD OF LANGUAGE, Grades K-8 from the Professional Handbook
English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

38

Analytic Oral Language Scoring Rubric
EL students’ portfolios should also include an Analytic Oral Language Scoring Rubric
completed by the teacher or teachers working directly with the student. This rubric can
be used to determine whether a students’ oral language proficiency is social only, or
both social and academic.

1

2

3

4

5

6

Begins to
name
concrete
objects

Begins to
communicate
personal and
survival
needs

Begins to
initiate
conversations; retells
a story or
experience;
asks and
responds to
simple
questions

Initiates and
sustains a
conversation
with
descriptors
and details;
exhibits selfconfidence in
social
situations;
begins to
communicate
in classroom
settings

Speaks in
social and
classroom
settings with
sustained
and
connected
discourse;
any errors do
not interfere
with meaning

Communicates
competently
in social and
classroom
settings

Repeats
words and
phrases

Speaks in
single-word
utterances
and short
patterns

Speaks
hesitantly
because of
rephrasing
and
searching for
words

Speaks with
occasional
hesitation

Speaks with
near-native
fluency; any
hesitations
do not
interfere with
communication

Speaks
fluently

Uses
predominantly present
tense verbs;
demonstrates
errors or
omission
(leaves words
out, word
endings off)

Uses some
complex
sentences;
applies rules
of grammar
but lacks
control of
irregular
forms (e.g.,
runned,
mans, not
never, more
higher)

Uses a
variety of
structures
with
occasional
grammatical
errors

Masters a
variety of
grammatical
structures

Structure

Fluency

Speaking

Focus/
Rating:

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

39

Vocabulary
Listening

Understands
little or no
English

Uses
functional
vocabulary

Uses limited
vocabulary

Uses
adequate
vocabulary;
some word
usage
irregularities

Uses varied
vocabulary

Uses
extensive
vocabulary
but may lag
behind
nativespeaking
peers

Understands
words and
phrases,
requires
repetition

Understands
simple
sentences in
sustained
conversation;
requires
repetition

Understands
classroom
discussions
with
repetition,
rephrasing,
and
clarification

Understands
most spoken
language,
including
classroom
discussion

Understands
classroom
discussion
without
difficulty

Adapted from a rating scale developed by ESL teachers Portfolio Assessment Group (Grades 1-12), Fairfax County Public Schools,
Virginia.

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

40

SECTION IV:
Student Portfolios

This section includes the following information:
1.

Elementary School Reading/Writing Portfolio Cover Sheet

2.

Middle School Reading/Writing Portfolio Cover Sheet

3.

High School Reading/Writing Portfolio Cover Sheet

4.

Portfolio Evaluation Summary

5.

Summary Evaluation Guidelines

6.

EL’s Content Area Progress

7.

Self-Assessment of Academic Language Functions

8.

EL’s Language and Academic Progress

9.

Self-Assessment of Oral Language

10.

Self-Assessment of Speaking Ability

11.

Oral Scoring Rubric

12.

Math Development Checklist

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

41

Once students have been identified as needing EL support, a student portfolio can
be created. Below is a model of a portfolio cover sheet for elementary school EL students. The
student’s portfolio would be used to record test scores, class scores, and would include selfassessment documentation from the student to to aid in determining whether a child is ready for
removal from EL classes or needs continued support.

Elementary School Reading/Writing Portfolio Cover Sheet
Student: _________________________________ School Year: ___________
Teacher: ________________________________ Grade Level: ___________
School: _________________________________

Required Content

1st
Quarter

2nd
Quarter

3rd
Quarter

4th
Quarter

1st
Quarter

2nd
Quarter

3rd
4th
Quarter Quarter

1. Oral summary
2. Story summary (writing or drawing)
3. Writing sample (teacher choice)
4. Student choice of writing (any choice)
5. Student self-evaluation

Optional Content
1. List of books/stories read in class
2. List of books/stories read independently
3. Reading interest inventory
4. Literacy development checklist
5. Content sample (e.g., reading
comprehension sample, project, report)
6. Student choice (any type)
Test

Initial Testing

Final Testing

Screener

_____Date

_____Score

_____Level

_____Date

_____Score

_____Level

Reading

_____Date

_____Score

_____Level

_____Date

_____Score

_____Level

Writing

_____Date

_____Score

_____Level

_____Date

_____Score

_____Level

Placement

Comments:
Adapted from portfolio developed by elementary school ESL teachers, Prince William County Public Schools, Virginia. © Addison-Wesley.
Authentic Assessment for English Language Learners. O’Malley/Valdez Pierce. This page may be reproduced for classroom use.

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

42

Once students have been identified as needing EL support, a student portfolio can
be created. Below is a model of a portfolio cover sheet for middle school EL students. The
student’s portfolio would be used to record test scores, class scores, and would include selfassessment documentation from the student to to aid in determining whether a child is ready for
removal from EL classes or needs continued support.

Middle School Reading/Writing Portfolio Cover Sheet
Student: ________________________________ Grade: ______________
Teacher: ________________________________ School: ______________
Level: __________________________________ School Year:___________
1st
Quarter

Required Content

2nd
Quarter

3rd
Quarter

4th
Quarter

1st
2nd
Quarter Quarter

3rd
Quarter

4th
Quarter

1. Cloze sample
2. Writing sample
3. Self-rating strategies checklist
4. List of books read
5. Reading passage with comprehension
questions

Optional Content
1. Content area samples
2. Audio/visual performances
3. Illustrations
4. Other

1st Quarter

Teacher Observations
3rd Quarter

2nd Quarter

4th Quarter

Parent Comments

___________________
Signature

___________________
Signature

____________________
Signature

___________________
Signature

Adapted from portfolio developed by middle school ESL teachers, Prince William County Public Schools, Virginia. © Addison-Wesley. Authentic
Assessment for English Language Learners. O’Malley/Valdez Pierce. This page may be reproduced for classroom use.

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

43

Once students have been identified as needing EL support, a student portfolio can
be created. Below is a model of a portfolio cover sheet for high school EL students. The
student’s portfolio would be used to record test scores, class scores, and would include selfassessment documentation from the student to aid in determining whether a child is ready for
removal from EL classes or needs continued support.

High School Reading/Writing Portfolio Cover Sheet
Student: ________________________________ Grade: ______________
Teacher: ________________________________ School: ______________
Level: __________________________________ School Year: __________
Date of Entry: ____________________________
1st
Quarter

Required Content

2nd
Quarter

3rd
Quarter

4th
Quarter

1st
2nd
Quarter Quarter

3rd
Quarter

4th
Quarter

1. Reading passage with comprehension
questions
1. Cloze Sample
2. Writing Sample
3. Written response to oral stimulus
4. Written response to prompt/literature
5. Self-rating strategies checklist
6. Student choice

Optional Content
1. Content area samples
2. Audio/visual performances
3. List readings with short synopsis
4. Oral language sample (including native
language)

5. Other

1st Quarter

2nd Quarter

3rd Quarter

4th Quarter

Test scores

Test scores

Test scores

Test scores

__________________
Signature

__________________
Signature

__________________
Signature

__________________
Signature

Adapted from portfolio developed by high school ESL teachers, Prince William County Public Schools, Virginia. © Addison-Wesley. Authentic
Assessment for English Language Learners. O’Malley/Valdez Pierce. This page may be reproduced for classroom use.

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

44

The Portfolio Evaluation Summary Form may be used to determine how a student
meets academic standards in their first language (L1) compared to their second language
(L2). For this form to be used, students would need to be given the opportunity to test on
curriculum in their native language.

Portfolio Evaluation Summary
Student: __________________________ Grade: ______ Date: __________
Teacher: __________________________ School: ____________________
First Language (L1): ______________ Second Language (L2):______________

Direction: Circle L1 or L2 to indicate if the student meets the standard.
Curriculum/
Assessment Area

Does Not Meet
Standards

Meets
Standards

Exceeds
Standards

Oral Language

L1

L2

L1

L2

L1

L2

Written Language

L1

L2

L1

L2

L1

L2

Reading

L1

L2

L1

L2

L1

L2

Overall Summary

L1

L2

L1

L2

L1

L2

Comments:

Adapted from M. Gottlieb in Valdez Pierce and Gottlieb (1994). © Addison-Wesley. Authentic Assessment for English Language
Learners. O’Malley/Valdez Pierce. This page may be reproduced for classroom use.

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

45

The following Summary Evaluation Guidelines Rubric may be used to evaluate the
student’s academic performance.

Summary Evaluation Guidelines
Student: ____________________________________ Date: ____________

This student:

Never

Sometimes

Often

Always

Identifies the topic

1

2

3

4

Identifies the main idea

1

2

3

4

Combines/chunks similar ideas

1

2

3

4

Paraphrases accurately

1

2

3

4

Deletes minor details

1

2

3

4

Reflects author’s emphasis

1

2

3

4

Recognizes author’s purpose

1

2

3

4

Stays within appropriate length

1

2

3

4

Comments:

Adapted from Casazza (1992) © Addison-Wesley. Authentic Assessment for English Language Learners. O’Malley/Valdez
Pierce. This page may be reproduced for classroom use.

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

46

The following Content Area Progress form may be used to evaluate the student’s
academic performance.

EL’s Content Area Progress
Student: _______________________________ Class: ________________
Teacher: ___________________________

Grade: ______ Date: ________

1. Level of performance in relation to the concepts and skills identified in the
content area:
Below grade level
At grade level
Above grade level
1

2

3

4

5

2. Work habits in class: Does he or she understand and follow directions?
Understand the content, problem, solution process? Ask for assistance? Bring
required materials?
No Effort
Average
Hard-working
1

2

3

4

5

3. Recommendations: What kind of help does the student need during the coming
weeks or months?

4. How can these recommendations be accomplished?

5. What grade does the student have in class to date? __________________
Notes:

Adapted from: Eastern Stream Center on Resources and Training (ESCORT). (2003). Help! They Don't Speak English.
Starter Kit for Primary Teachers. Oneonta, NY: State University College. This page may be reproduced for classroom use.

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

47

An important part of the student’s portfolio is evidence of student Self-Assessment of
Academic Language Functions. These could be completed monthly, quarterly, or each
semester. Early on, a student might need the assistance of an interpreter to help them complete the
self-assessment.

Self-Assessment of Academic Language Functions
Name: _____________________________________ Date: _____________
Check the box that shows what you can do. Add comments.
Difficulty Level
Task

Not Very
Well

Okay

Well

Very
Well

Comments

1. I can describe objects
and people.
2. I can describe past
events.
3. I can listen to and
understand radio
programs.
4. I can listen to and
understand video and
television.
5. I can state an opinion.

6. I can agree and
disagree.
7. I can summarize a
story.
8. I can give an oral
report.

Adapted from Bachman and Palmer (1989). © Addison-Wesley. Authentic Assessment for English Language Learners.
O’Malley/Valdez Pierce. This page may be reproduced for classroom use.

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

48

The following Language and Academic Progress form may be used to monitor overall
student progress.

EL’s Language and Academic Progress
Student: _______________________________ Class: ________________
Teacher: ___________________________

Grade: ______ Date: ________

Low

Average

High

1. Progress during the past month

1

2

3

4

5

2. Performance in class on:
• Oral comprehension

1

2

3

4

5

• Reading comprehension

1

2

3

4

5

• Communicates ideas through
writing assignments

1

2

3

4

5

• Works independently

1

2

3

4

5

• Asks for help when needed

1

2

3

4

5

• Successful completion of tests
and assessments

1

2

3

4

5

3. Recommendations: What kind of help does the EL student need during the
coming weeks or months?

4. How can these recommendations be accomplished?

5. Other:

Adapted from: Eastern Stream Center on Resources and Training (ESCORT). (2003). Help! They Don't Speak English. Starter
Kit for Primary Teachers. Washington, D.C.: Center for Applied Linguistics. This page may be reproduced for classroom use.

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

49

An important part of the student’s portfolio is evidence of student Self-Assessment of
Oral Language. These could be completed monthly, quarterly, or each semester. Early on, a
student might need the assistance of an interpreter to help them complete the forms.

Self-Assessment of Oral Language
Name: _____________________________________ Date: _____________

Check the box that shows what you can do. Add comments.
What Can You Do
in English?

Difficulty Level
Not Very
Well

Okay

Well

Very
Well

Comments

1. I can ask
questions in class.
2. I can understand
others when
working in a
group.
3. I can understand
television shows.
4. I can speak with
native English
speakers outside
of school.
5. I can talk on the
phone.

6. I can ask for an
explanation.

Adapted from Bachman and Palmer (1989). © Addison-Wesley. Authentic Assessment for English Language Learners.
O’Malley/Valdez Pierce. This page may be reproduced for classroom use.

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

50

An important part of the student’s portfolio is evidence of student Self-Assessment of
Speaking Ability. These could be completed monthly, quarterly, or each semester. Early
on, a student might need the assistance of an interpreter to help them complete the forms.

Self-Assessment of Speaking Ability
Name: _____________________________________ Date: _____________

Part 1: Place an X on each line to show how much you agree or disagree.
This week I used English to talk with ______________________________.
1. I think that I was successful.

Disagree

Agree

2. The person I spoke to understood me.

Disagree

Agree

3. I felt comfortable speaking with
this person in English.

Disagree

Agree

4. I understood everything that
this person said to me.

Disagree

Agree

5. I could do this again with no problem.

Disagree

Agree

Part 2: Complete the sentences below.
6. When someone doesn’t understand me, I ______________________________.

7. When I don’t understand someone, I _________________________________.

8. Now I know _________________________________________________.

Adapted from a form developed by ESL teacher M. Crossman (1994). Addison-Wesley: Authentic Assessment for English
Language Learners. O’Malley/Valdez Pierce. This page may be reproduced for classroom use.

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

51

The following Oral Scoring Rubric may be used to evaluate the overall oral
communication skills of ELs.

Oral Scoring Rubric
Student: _______________________________ Class: ________________
Teacher: ___________________________

Grade: ______ Date: ________

Level

Description

5

Communicates very well in social and academic
English; uses content vocabulary, has command of
basic grammatical structures; participates in
classroom discussion.

3

Communicates with some difficulty but conveys
meaning; uses some grammar structures but has
problems with verb tenses and use of singular and
plural; uses content vocabulary with some difficulty;
and communicates well in social contexts.

1

Can name concrete objects displayed; repeats words
and phrases; understands English very little or not at
all.

Notes:

Adapted from: Clemons, J., Areglado, L., & Dill, M. (1993). Portfolios in the classroom. New York: Scholastic.
This page may be reproduced for classroom use.

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

52

The following Math Development Checklist may be used to evaluate the performance
of ELs.

Math Development Checklist
Student: ____________________________ Class: ___________________
Teacher: ____________________________ Grade: ___ Date: __________

1. Counts to 1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Does not apply____ Most of the time____ Sometimes____ Not noticed yet_____
2. Has 1:1 correspondence

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Does not apply____ Most of the time____ Sometimes____ Not noticed yet_____
3. Verbalizes addition
Does not apply____ Most of the time____ Sometimes____ Not noticed yet_____
4. Verbalizes subtraction
Does not apply____ Most of the time____ Sometimes____ Not noticed yet_____
5. Symbolizes addition to 1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Does not apply____ Most of the time____ Sometimes____ Not noticed yet_____
6. Symbolizes subtraction to

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Does not apply____ Most of the time____ Sometimes____ Not noticed yet_____
7. Verbalizes multiplication
Does not apply____ Most of the time____ Sometimes____ Not noticed yet_____
8. Other:
Does not apply____ Most of the time____ Sometimes____ Not noticed yet_____
Comments:

Adapted from: Eastern Stream Center on Resources and Training (ESCORT). (2003). Help! They Don't Speak English.
Starter Kit for Primary Teachers. Oneonta, NY: State University College. This page may be reproduced for classroom use.

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

53

SECTION V:
Appendix

This section includes the following information:
1. Common Acronyms
2. Key Terminology
3. Absolute Beginners - One Stop English
http://www.onestopenglish.com/
4. Introduction to the LaRue Reading Skills Assessment
http://www.mcedservices.com/ESL/Littest.html
5. Instructions for using the LaRue Reading Skills Assessment
6. Department of Intervention Services Contact Information

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

54

Common Acronyms
ACCESS

Assessing Comprehension and Communication in English State-to-State

AMAO

Annual Measurable Achievement Objectives

BICS

Basic Interpersonal Communicative Skills

CALP

Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency

CRT

Criterion-referenced Test

EEOA

Equal Educational Opportunities Act

ELD

English Language Development

EL

English Learner

ESEA

Elementary and Secondary Education Act

ESL

English as a Second Language

ESSA

Every Student Succeeds Act

FEP

Fluent (or fully) English Proficient

IEP

Individualized Education Plan (or Program)

LAD

Language Acquisition Device

LEA

Local Education Agency; school district

LEP

Limited English Proficient

MCT2

Mississippi Curriculum Test, Second Edition

MDE

Mississippi Department of Education

MPI

Model Performance Indicators

NCELA

National Clearinghouse for English Language Acquisition

NCLB

No Child Left Behind Act of 2001

NEP

Non-English Proficient

NRT

Norm-referenced Test

OCR

Office for Civil Rights

OELA

Office of English Language Acquisition

RtI

Response to Intervention

SEA

State Education Agency

SET

Student Evaluation Team

TPR

Total Physical Response

USDOE

United States Department of Education

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

55

Key Terminology
Academic language proficiency: The use of language in acquiring academic
content in formal schooling contexts, including specialized or technical language and
discourse related to each content area.
Accommodation: Adapting language (spoken or written) to make it more
understandable to second language learners. In assessment, accommodations may
be made to the presentation, response method, setting, or timing/scheduling of the
assessment.
Affective Filter: The affective filter is a screen of emotion that can block language
acquisition or learning. A high affective filter keeps the users from learning by being
too embarrassed or too self-conscious to take risks during communicative
exchanges.
Annual Measureable Achievement Objectives (AMAOs): Mandated by No Child
Left Behind, Title III to demonstrate student progress in acquiring the English
language. Language progress is measured and reported to the federal government.
Districts not making appropriate progress are subject to sanctions.
Basic Interpersonal Communication Skills (BICS): The language ability
required for face-to-face communication where linguistic interactions are embedded
in a situational context.
Bilingual Education Act: Enacted in Congress in 1968 as Title VII of the Elementary
and Secondary Education Act (ESEA) of 1965 as amended. It established a
discretionary competitive grant program to fund bilingual education programs for
economically disadvantaged language minority students, in recognition of the unique
educational disadvantages faced by non-English speaking students. The Act was
reauthorized in 1974, 1978, 1984, 1988, 1994, and 2001. Each reauthorization
brought changes in the types of bilingual education programs that could receive
federal grants (Crawford, 1995; Baker, 2001). Under the No Child Left Behind Act of
2001, former Title VII programs are now subsumed under Title III: Language
Instruction for Limited English Proficient and Immigrant Students.
Bilingualism: The ability to speak two languages. Defining bilingualism is problematic
since individuals with varying bilingual characteristics may be classified as bilingual.
One approach is to recognize various categories of bilingualism such as bilingual
ability through the determination of bilingual proficiency that includes consideration
of the four language dimensions: listening, speaking, reading, and writing.
Bilingual Education: An educational program in which two languages are used to
provide content matter instruction. As with the term bilingualism, bilingual
English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

56

education is "a simple label for a complex phenomenon." An important distinction is
between those programs that use and promote two languages and those where
bilingual children are present, but bilingualism is not fostered in the curriculum
(Baker & Jones, 1998).
CAN DO Descriptors: General performance indicators that describe typical behaviors
of ELs in each language domain at each level of English language proficiency.
Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency (CALP): The language ability
required for academic achievement in a context-reduced environment such as
classroom lectures and textbook reading assignments.
Carnegie Unit: A standard measure of high school work indicating the minimum
amount of time that instruction in a subject has been provided. Awarding of one
Carnegie unit indicates that a minimum of 140 hours of instruction has been
provided in regular and laboratory classes over a school year; awarding of ½
Carnegie unit indicates that a minimum of 70 hours has been provided.
Castañeda v. Pickard: On June 23, 1981, the Fifth Circuit Court issued a decision
that is the seminal post-Lau decision concerning education of language minority
students. The case established a three-part test to evaluate the adequacy of a
district's program for ELs: (1) is the program based on an educational theory
recognized as sound by some experts in the field or considered by experts as a
legitimate experimental strategy; (2) are the programs and practices, including
resources and personnel, reasonably calculated to implement this theory effectively;
and (3) does the LEA evaluate its programs and make adjustments where needed to
ensure language barriers are actually being overcome? [648 F.2d 989 (5th Cir.
1981)].
Cognitive Academic Language Learning Approach (CALLA): Instructional
approach that provides explicit teaching of learning strategies within academic
subject areas. Strategies are divided into three major characteristics: meta cognitive
(planning, self-monitoring, classifying etc.), cognitive (note taking, summarizing,
making inferences etc.), and social - affective (asking questions, cooperative
learning, peer tutoring, etc.).
Cognitive Academic Language Proficiency (CALP): The type of abstract
language needed for academic success. This may take from five to seven years to
develop.
Communicative Approaches: Teaching approach where negotiation for meaning is
critical.
Comprehensible Input: Input + 1, instruction that is just above the student’s ability;
instructional level.
English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

57

Cultural Awareness: Understanding that students come from a variety of ethnic,
geographic, economic and religious backgrounds and how these diverse cultural
and/or academic backgrounds impact the instructional process.
Dominant Language: The language with which the speaker has greater proficiency
and/or uses most often.
English as a Second Language (ESL): An educational approach in which ELs are
instructed in the use of the English language. Instruction is based on special
curricula that typically involve little or no use of the native language and is usually
taught during specific school periods. For the rest of the school day, students may be
placed in mainstream classes, an immersion program, or a bilingual program.
English Learner: Anyone whose native language is not English, but who is in the
process of learning English and who may benefit from various types of language
support programs. This term is used mainly in the U.S. to describe K-12 students
who are English Language Learners.
English as a Second Language (ESL): often used interchangeably with ELL or EL
Equal Education Opportunities Act of 1974: This civil rights statute prohibits
states from denying equal educational opportunity to an individual based on his or
her race, color, sex, or national origin. The statute specifically prohibits states from
denying equal educational opportunity by the failure of an educational agency to take
appropriate action to overcome language barriers that impede equal participation by
its students in its instructional programs. [20 U.S.C. §1203(f)].
Gifted Program: Special instructional programs designed to meet the individual
needs of intellectually gifted children in addition to and different from the general
classroom instructional setting.
Home Language Survey (HLS): Form completed by parents/guardians that gives
information about a student’s language background. Must be kept in the student’s
cumulative folder.
Immigrant Child: According to Title III of the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001, an
immigrant child is an individual who:
(A) is aged 3 through 21;
(B) was not born in any State; and
(C) has not been attending one or more schools in any one or more States for
more than three (3) full academic years.
Interpreter: A person who translates orally from one language to another.

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

58

Interventions: All students are entitled to appropriate instructional interventions.
Interventions may include alternative strategies and assessments and added time to
learn the curriculum. Interventions provide additional opportunities for students to
master the curriculum. They differ from modifications since interventions do not
include changing or deleting objectives in the curriculum. ESL classes are
appropriate instructional interventions for ELs. Core content courses delivered
through a sheltered approach are also appropriate interventions for ELs.
L1: The first language that a person acquires; also referred to as the native language.
L2: The second language that a person acquires.
Language Acquisition Device (LAD): The hypothesized "device" in the brain that
allows humans to acquire language.
Language Acquisition Theory (Krashen and others): Theory in which the
acquisition and learning of the L2 are viewed as two separate processes, with
learning being knowing about a language and acquiring the language that is used in
real conversation. This theory embodies the following hypotheses: 1) natural order;
natural progression of language development; 2) monitor; an innate error detecting
mechanism that scans utterances for accuracy in order to make corrections; 3)
comprehensible input, as defined earlier; 4) affective filter, as defined earlier
Language domains: The four main subdivisions of language: listening, speaking,
reading, and writing.
LAS Links: The assessment used to identify and monitor the progress of EL students
in Mississippi, as well as some other states. The web-based assessment includes tests
in listening, speaking, reading and writing, as required under federal guidelines.
Language Instruction Educational Program: According to Title III of the No
Child Left Behind Act of 2001, language instruction educational program means an
instruction course: (A) in which a limited English proficient child is placed for the
purpose of developing and attaining English proficiency, while meeting challenging
State academic content and student academic achievement standards; and (B) that
may make instructional use of both English and a child’s native language to enable
the child to develop and attain English proficiency, and may include the
participation of English proficient children if such course is designed to enable all
participating children to become proficient in English and a second language.
Language Proficiency: Refers to the degree to which the student exhibits control
over the use of language, including the measurement of expressive and receptive
language skills in the areas of phonology, syntax, vocabulary, and semantics and
including the areas of pragmatics or language use within various domains or social

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

59

circumstances. Proficiency in a language is judged independently and does not imply
a lack of proficiency in another language.
Language Service Plan: An individual plan detailing the English language services
that will be received by the EL student. The plan should be updated annually until
the student exits EL status. Plans are developed by Student Evaluation Teams, which
should include, at the minimum, an ESL teacher, general education teacher, a school
administrator and a parent representative. The team should meet quarterly.
Lau v. Nichols: Class action lawsuit brought by parents of non-English-proficient
Chinese students against the San Francisco Unified LEA. In 1974, the Supreme Court
ruled that identical education does not constitute equal education under the Civil
Rights Act of 1964. The court ruled that the district must take affirmative steps to
overcome educational barriers faced by the non-English speaking Chinese students
in the district. [414 U.S. 563 (1974)]
Limited English Proficient (LEP): Employed by the U.S. Department of Education
to refer to ELs who lack sufficient mastery of English to meet state standards and
excel in an English-language classroom. Increasingly, English Learner (EL) is used
to describe this population, because it highlights learning, rather than suggesting
that non-native-English-speaking students are deficient.
Linguistic complexity: The amount and quality of speech or writing for a given
situation.
Local Education Agency (LEA): This is your local school district.
Maintenance Bilingual Education Program: Bilingual program whose goal is to
maintain English learners’ native language and culture. Students are encouraged to
be proficient in English and their native language.
The May 25 Memorandum: To clarify a LEA's responsibilities with respect to
national-origin-minority children, the U.S. Department of Health, Education, and
Welfare, on May 25, 1970, issued a policy statement stating, in part, that "where
inability to speak and understand the English language excludes national-origin
minority group children from effective participation in the educational program
offered by a LEA, the district must take affirmative steps to rectify the language
deficiency in order to open the instructional program to the students."
Migrant Child: Migrant child means a child who is, or whose parent, spouse or
guardian is, a migratory agricultural worker or migratory fisher and who, in the
preceding thirty-six (36) months, has moved from one LEA to another to obtain or
accompany such parent, spouse, or guardian in order to obtain temporary or
seasonal employment in the agricultural or fishing industry as a principle means of
livelihood.
English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

60

Model Performance Indicators (MPIs): The term “model performance indicator”
(MPI) refers to a single cell within the standards’ matrices that describes a specific
level of English language proficiency for a particular language domain (listening,
speaking, reading, writing).
Native Language: The first language learned in the home, or the home language.
Often, it continues to be the students’ stronger language in terms of competence and
function.
No Child Left Behind Act of 2001 (NCLB): Sets broad and in-depth accountability
requirements for English Learners.
Non-English Proficient (NEP): This term describes students who are just beginning
to learn English. They are also considered EL, but at the lowest end of the proficiency
scale.
NRT: A norm-referenced test.
Office for Civil Rights (OCR): The Office for Civil Rights of the U.S. Department of
Education is responsible for enforcing Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which
prohibits discrimination based on race, color, national origin, disability, sex, or age.
Paraprofessional: An individual who is employed in a preschool, elementary school,
or secondary school under the supervision of a licensed teacher, including
individuals employed in language instruction educational programs, special
education, and migrant education.
Parent Involvement: Any program or activity that encourages parents to become
involved in their child's education; for example, conferences, volunteering, helping
the child with homework, attending workshops on parenting.
Phase or Stage: Periods of language development that typically used in discussion of
language ability instead of ages to refer to a child’s progress in second language
development.
Primary Language: The language of most benefit in learning new and difficult
information.
Pull-out: A program model in which a paraprofessional or tutor pulls students from
their classes for small group or individual work.
Realia: Real-life objects used for supporting language development.
Response to Intervention (RTI): Response to Intervention (RTI) is a system used
at each school to screen, assess, identify, plan for, and provide interventions to any
student at risk of school failure due to academic or behavior needs.

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

61

Scaffolding: Building on already acquired skills and knowledge from level to level of
language proficiency based on increased linguistic complexity, vocabulary usage and
language control through the use of supports.
Sheltered Courses: High school content courses (usually social studies, science,
math, or English literature/language arts) in which the instruction and assessment
are tailored to the proficiency level of ELs.
Sheltered Instruction: A sheltered delivery model is defined as one in which teachers
incorporate second language acquisition principles with traditional teaching
methodologies to increase the comprehension of the content being taught.
Sheltered/Structured English Immersion Teacher: Is a teacher who has
received a minimum of 32 hours of SIOP® training in instructional strategies for
English Learners. On site coaching and consulting is also provided as a part of
ongoing professional development support.
Supplementary Assessment: Assessment that is different from a traditional paperand-pencil test. This type of assessment usually examines how well a student can
perform a real-life or hands-on task.
Syntax: The study of the sentence patterns of a language and the rules that govern the
correctness of sentences.
Teacher Support Team (TST): A problem-solving unit responsible for interventions
developed at Tier 3 of RtI. It is a requirement that every school have a Teacher
Support Team and that the team be implemented in accordance with the process
developed by the Mississippi Department of Education.
Teachers of English to Speakers of Other Languages (TESOL): This is the
international professional organization.
Teachers of English to Speakers of Other Languages (TESOL) PreK-12
English Language Proficiency Standards: The set of standards aligned to the
LAS Links assessment, which is used to identify and monitor the progress of EL
students in Mississippi. These standards should be used to guide and inform
instruction by both EL and general education teachers.
Title I: Title I of the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001 supports programs to assist
economically disadvantaged students and students at risk of not meeting educational
standards. The reauthorized Title I makes it clear that ELs are eligible for services on
the same basis as other students.
Title III: Title III of the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001 ensures that ELs, including
immigrant children and youth, develop English proficiency and meet the same
academic content and academic achievement standards that other children are
English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

62

expected to meet. Title III effectively establishes national policy by acknowledging
the needs of ELs and their families.
Title VI: Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 prohibits discrimination on the basis of
race, color, or national origin in programs and activities that receive federal funding.
Total Physical Response (TPR): Communicative approach where students respond
first with actions, not words. Instruction is accomplished through the use of
commands.
Translator: A person (or computer program or application) that translates written
documents from one language to another. This term is sometimes used
simultaneously with the term interpreter, however, interpreter is someone who
translates oral language as opposed to written language.
Waiver: Official document needed for parents who decline the services of the Language
Instruction Educational Program while the student is considered EL. In these cases,
a waiver is required. The waiver must state that students are held accountable for
meeting all grade level expectations for Mississippi standards and state mandated
standardized testing.

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

63

Absolute Beginners Lesson Plans

Absolute Beginners

by Frances Marnie
Unit 1

Level: Beginners with no previous knowledge of Roman script
Age: Adults
Time: 90-120 minutes
Language objectives: hello, what’s your name?, alphabet (upper case), repeat please, numbers 1-5,
book, pen, chair, table, goodbye
Key skills: speaking, reading, listening, writing
Materials: one set of cut-out alphabet cards (laminated, if possible) per pair of students; one alphabet
formation sheet per student; one set of flash cards; one REPEAT PLEASE sign; the following objects in the
classroom: pen, book, table, chair; sticky labels

Notes for an interpreter – Part 1
If an interpreter is available (e.g. a family member
or friend of the student who speaks good English),
try to follow the steps below before or at the start of
the lesson.
•

Enlist their help with Exercises 1 and 2 and
ask them to translate repeat please for the
student. They should not be encouraged to
stay for the whole lesson as this may inhibit
the student and / or reinforce the student’s
dependence on an interpreter.

•

Ask them if they can return at the end of
the lesson to clarify, if necessary, any
language items.

•

If they are not available at the end of the
lesson, agree on the best means of
communication, e.g. by phone or by attaching
notes to the student’s worksheet.

2. Ask a confident-looking student What’s your name?
If the student answers, repeat the name as accurately
as possible and watch for signs of confirmation that
you have got it right.
If the student looks confused, introduce yourself, e.g.
My name is Susan Smith. Point to yourself as you say
this. Repeat What’s your name? whilst gesturing to
the student. If there is still no response, prompt them
by saying their name. That should elicit at least a nod.
Repeat What’s your name? The student should now
understand what is required and give their name.
Introduce yourself again and ask What’s your name?
Encourage, prompting if necessary, the response, e.g.
My name is Yasmin Asif. Repeat this process with all
the students. Encourage group members to help
each other.
3. Model the question What’s your name? and ask the
students to repeat please, pointing to the REPEAT
PLEASE sign on the wall. Put the students in pairs to
practise What’s your name? My name is… . Practise
until each student is comfortable with this exchange.

Why teach upper-case letters first?

•

Write your own name, and each student’s name,
on separate sticky labels. Use upper case only and
place them on a table in the middle of the classroom
(to arouse curiosity).

Only upper-case letters are introduced in the first unit
to simplify the presentation of the alphabet at this
stage. This is because:

•

Stick the REPEAT PLEASE sign to the front wall of
the classroom.

c. The majority of administration forms require upper
case only.

•P
H

© Macmillan Publishers Limited, 2013
ESOL / Absolute Beginners / Unit 1

b. One of the main focuses of this unit is the students’
names. A name can be written in upper case only but
cannot be written in lower case only.

O

1. When the students enter, smile and say hello. If the
student replies with hello, smile encouragingly and nod
to show that is the right response – even if the attempt
is not produced perfectly. If the student says nothing,
let it pass for now. The word will be reviewed before
the end of the lesson and it is important to start on a
positive note.

N T
O
FR BE C
O DO O
M W P
W N IA
EB LO B
SI A L
TE DE E
D •

Procedure

a. The aim of the series is to provide ‘survival
English’ and the majority of social signs are in upper
case (e.g. street names, shop names, signs for
toilets, hospital signs, car registration plates).

CA

TEACHER’S NOTES

Before the lesson

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

64

Absolute Beginners

by Frances Marnie
Unit 1
Level: Beginners
Age: Adults
Time: Approx. 90 minutes

Language objectives: hello, what’s your name?, alphabet, repeat please, spell please, numbers 1-5,
book, pen, chair, table, goodbye
Key skills: speaking, reading, listening, writing
Materials: one set of cut-out alphabet cards (laminated, if possible) per pair of students; one set of flashcards;
one Repeat please sign; one Spell please sign; the following objects in the classroom: pen, book, table, chair;
sticky labels

Enlist their help with Exercises 1 and 2 and ask
them to translate repeat please and spell please
for the student. They should not be encouraged
to stay for the whole lesson as this may inhibit
the student and / or reinforce the student’s
dependence on an interpreter.

•

Ask them if they can return at the end of the
lesson to clarify, if necessary, any language items.

•

If they are not available at the end of the lesson,
agree on the best means of communication,
e.g. by phone or by attaching notes to the
student’s worksheet.

Before the lesson
•

Stick the Repeat please / Spell please signs on the
front wall of the classroom.

Procedure
1. When the students enter, smile and say hello. If the
student replies with hello, smile encouragingly and nod to
show that is the right response – even if the attempt is not
produced perfectly. If the student says nothing, let it pass
for now. The word will be reviewed before the end of the
lesson and it is important to start on a positive note.

The rhythm of the chant is designed to help students
learn the alphabet more easily. It can be repeated
several times in the first class and used again in
future lessons until the students are comfortable with
the alphabet.

H

© Macmillan Publishers Limited, 2013
ESOL / Absolute Beginners / Unit 1

5. Write the full alphabet on the whiteboard and play
Track 1 (the alphabet chant). Point to each letter as it
is named. Play the track several times, encouraging
the students to join in at any point if they are able to
name a letter. Allow time for students to write any notes
on the pronunciation of the letters that will help them
remember it. You could test the students at this stage
by pausing the audio file and asking students to either
say the next letter or point to the last letter spoken on
their alphabet formation sheets.

O

2. Ask a confident-looking student What’s your name?
If the student answers, repeat the name as accurately
as possible and watch for signs of confirmation that
you have got it right.

4. Introduce yourself again and make a show of
looking for the sticky label with your name on it. Find
it and stick it on yourself. Ask What’s your name?
encouraging the response, e.g. My name is Yasmin
Asif. Using gesture, ask them to find the sticky label
with their name and put it on themselves. Repeat this
process with all the students and encourage group
members to help each other.

•P

TEACHER’S NOTES

•

Write your own name, and each student’s name,
on separate sticky labels. Place them on a table in
the middle of the classroom.

3. Model the question What’s your name? and ask
the students to repeat please, pointing to the Repeat
please sign. Put the students in pairs to practise
What’s your name? My name is … Practise until each
student is comfortable with this exchange.

CA

•

If the student looks confused, introduce yourself, e.g.
My name is Susan Smith. Point to yourself as you say
this. Repeat What’s your name? whilst gesturing to
the student. If there is still no response, prompt them
by saying their name. That should elicit at least a nod.
Repeat What’s your name? The student should now
understand what is required and give their name.
Introduce yourself again and ask What’s your name?
Encourage, prompting if necessary, the response, e.g.
My name is Yasmin Asif. Repeat this process with all the
students. Encourage group members to help each other.

N T
O
FR BE C
O DO O
M W P
W N IA
EB LO B
SI A L
TE DE E
D •

Notes for an interpreter – Part 1
If an interpreter is available (e.g. a family member
or friend of the student who speaks good English),
try to follow the steps below before or at the start of
the lesson.

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

65

Introduction to the LaRue Reading Skills Assessment for
Preliterate Students
The Reading Skills Assessment for Preliterate Students was developed to meet a need
for testing students who have very limited English literacy skills, and cannot read and
write in their own language. It was created to show which literacy skills and knowledge
preliterate ESL students have and don’t have. This assessment is not appropriate for
students who have attended school and learned to read and write in any language. It
also cannot accurately identify pre-literacy skills of students who are
literate in a language not written in a Roman alphabet. Some non-Roman
alphabet languages include Arabic, Greek, Russian, Thai and Chinese.
Research on education shows that reading as a skill is transferable from language to
language. Educated students, even if they don’t know a word of English, already
understand the idea of the alphabetical order, they already know that letters can be
represented in a variety of fonts, and that there is a correspondence between letters and
sounds in determining how to pronounce a word. They also know that languages,
however well organized, have exceptions to rules that need to be learned as exceptions.
However, some students have no educational background, and have never learned to
write in their native language. They often have great difficulty taking written tests of any
kind. This test is designed specifically for these students. It provides the instructor with
a starting point for their instruction in learning to read and write English. The skills and
knowledge that are needed to begin to learn to read are included in this test.
This test combines an oral interview by the instructor, along with reading and writing by
the student. It allows us to test the student’s knowledge of sounds and phonics, as well
as other literacy skills. It reveals what skills a student does and doesn’t have. This can
give the instructor information that is not available from the CASAS tests, since it is only
a paper and pencil test. The LaRue Reading Skills Assessment for Preliterate Students
will help you determine which skills need to be taught next, and whether a pre-literate
student has all of the literacy skills needed to join a mainstream ESL class.
If a student can score a total of 90 points or more on The LaRue Reading Skills
Assessment for Preliterate Students, that is strong evidence that they have basic literacy
skills and will be able to take the CASAS test 11 or 12, and get a meaningful score.

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

66

Instructions for using the LaRue Reading Skills Assessment A
This assessment is given as a one to one interview with the student. To test the student,
read the following script, and point to the examples on the test page as appropriate.
Have your student point to the correct answer, say the correct answer aloud, or write the
correct answer on the test page as appropriate. Mark the correct score for each question
on this page, as you give the test. Don’t correct the student if they answer incorrectly,
just acknowledge their answer and ask the next question. You can repeat each question
or statement only once. If the student doesn’t understand, move to the next question.
Note on pronunciation: If the student’s answer is accented but comprehensible, give
them credit. If their answer is too accented to be understood by most people, do not give
them credit.
The questions are ordered in increasing difficulty within each section. If a student
cannot answer the first two questions in each section, there is no need to ask them
further questions in that section. Move on to the next section to find out if they are more
proficient in another area.
There are 4 sections to this test. Subtotal each section separately. When you have
finished testing, refer to the Scoring Guide for help in interpreting the test scores.
SECTION

Score

1.

“This is an e, and this is an e.” For each of the following letters ask, “What is
this?” Score one point for each letter identified correctly.

2.

“This is an e, and this is an e.” For each of the following letters ask, “What is
this?” Score one point for each letter identified correctly.

3.

“This is a g, and this is a g.” For each of the following letters ask, “What is
this?” Score one point for each letter identified correctly.

4.

“This is an f, and this is a g.” For the following three letters ask, “What is this?’
Then ask, “What letter is next?” Score one point for each letter identified correctly.

5.

“This letter is s, and this letter is t.” For the following three letters ask, “What’s
this letter?” Then ask, “What letter is next?” Score one point for each letter identified
correctly.

Section I Subtotal
6.

“This number is 3, and this number is 4.” For the following three numbers ask,
“What’s this number?” And then ask, “What number is next?” Score one point for
each of the numbers identified correctly.

7.

“This phone number is 786-3295. What is this phone number?” Score one point for
each of the numbers identified correctly.

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

67

8.

“This number is 27.” For the following four numbers ask, “What is this
number?” Score one point for each of the numbers identified correctly.

9.

“This price is $1.29.” For the following four prices ask, “What’s this price?”
“One fifty nine” or “one dollar fifty nine” are both acceptable answers. “One five nine” is incorrect.
Score one point for each of the prices identified correctly.

10. “This time is two-ten.” For the following four times ask, “What’s this time?”
Score one point for each of the times identified correctly.

Section II Subtotal
11. “This word is can.” For the next four words ask, “What’s this word?”
Score one point for each of the words identified correctly.

12. “This word is also can.” For the next four words ask, “What’s this word?”
Score one point for each of the words identified correctly.

13. “This word is DIN.” For the next four words ask, “What’s this word?”
Score one point for each of the words identified correctly.

14. “This word is school.” For the next four words ask, “What’s this word?”
Score one point for each of the words identified correctly.

15. “This word is who.” For the next four words ask, “What’s this word?”
Score one point for each of the words identified correctly.

16. “This word is nine.” For the next four words ask, “What’s this word?”
Score one point for each of the words identified correctly.

Section III Subtotal
17. “Write your first name and your last name.” Score two points for each name spelled
correctly.
18. “This letter is e. Copy this letter. This letter is f. Copy this letter. This letter is
g. Copy this letter. Write the letter h.” Score 1 point for each letter correctly written. Score
half for wrong case.

19. “This letter is h. Copy this letter. This letter is i. Copy this letter. This letter is j.
Copy this letter. Write the letter k.” Score 1 point for each letter correctly written. Score half
for the wrong case.

20. “This word is mad. Copy this word. This word is sad. Copy this word. Write the
word dad.” Score one point for each word correctly written.
21. “This word is where. Copy this word. This word is how. Copy this word. Write
the word why.” Score one point for each word correctly written.
22. “This date is July 4th, 2001, and this date is 7/4/01. Write May 1st, 2001.” Score
one point each for the day, month, and year correctly written. The student can use either format for
writing the date.

23. “Write this sentence: ‘The woman has a baby.’” Score one point for each word written
correctly.

24. “Write this sentence: ‘Deb went to bed.’” Score one point for each word written correctly.
Section IV Subtotal
TEST TOTAL
The LaRue Reading Skills Assessment was created by Charles LaRue through a grant from the Minnesota Department of Children
Families and Learning under the supervision of the Minnesota Literacy Council. ©2001 MN Dept. of Children Families and Learning

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

68

LaRue Reading Skills Assessment A
Name: _________________________________ Date: _________________

Section I

1.

E

E

F

E

B

T

H

2.

e

e

o

c

e

a

a

3.

g

G

G

j

g

Q

g

4.

F

G

H

I

J

_____

5.

s

t

u

v

w

_____

4

5

6

7

____

151

500

Section II

6.

3

7.

786-3295

571-0436

8.

27

39

72

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

69

9.

$1.29

$2.59

$10.95

$59.95

$329.00

10.

2:10

3:15

4:30

12:02

9:45

Section III

11.

can

man

tan

plan

ran

12.

can

cap

cat

cash

cad

13.

DIN

DAN

DEN

DUN

DON

14.

school

good

child

baby

woman

15.

who

when

where

why

how

16.

nine

six

two

eight

twelve

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

70

Section IV

17.

___________________ ____________________

18. E ____

F ____

G _____

______

19. h ____

i ____

j _____

______

20. mad _________

sad _________

_________

21. where ________

how _________

_________

22. July 4, 2001

7/4/01

___________________

23.

_________________________________________

24.

_________________________________________

Adapted from The LaRue Reading Skills Assessment, created by Charles LaRue through a grant from the Minnesota Department
of Children Families and Learning under the supervision of the Minnesota Literacy Council. ©2001 MN Dept. of Children
Families and Learning

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

71

Name __________________________ Date _____________

LaRue Reading Skills Assessment A – Scoring Page

SCORE

SECTION I – Tests the ability to recognize and name letters and knowledge of alphabetical order.
1.

E

E

F

E

B

T

H

____ / 5

2.

e

e

o

c

e

a

a

____ / 5

3.

g

G

G

j

g

Q

g

____ / 5

4.

F

G

H

I

J

(K)

____ / 4

5.

s

t

u

v

w

(x )

____ / 4
SUBTOTAL

____ / 23

SECTION II – Tests the ability to name numbers, to read numbers as prices and times, and knowledge of numerical order.
6.

3

4

5

6

7

(8 )

____ / 4

7.

786-3295

571-0436

8.

27

39

72

151

500

____ / 4

9.

$1.29

$2.59

$10.95

$59.95

$329.00

____ / 4

10.

2:10

3:15

4:30

12:02

9:45

____ / 4

____ / 7

SUBTOTAL

____ / 23

SECTION III – Tests knowledge of letter sounds for beginning and ending consonants, short vowels, and sight words.
11.

can

man

tan

plan

ran

____ / 4

12.

can

cap

cat

cash

cad

____ / 4

13.

DIN

DAN

DEN

DUN

DON

____ / 4

14.

school

good

child

baby

woman

____ / 4

15.

who

when

where

why

how

____ / 4

16.

nine

six

two

eight

twelve

____ / 4
SUBTOTAL

____ / 24

SECTION IV – Tests the ability to copy and write letters, alphabetical order, write a date, write a sentence from dictation,
to spell phonetically and write sight words.

17.

(student first name)

(student last name)

____ / 4

18.

E ___

F ___

G ___

(H)

____ / 4

19.

h ___

i ___

j ___

(k)

____ / 4

20.

mad _______

sad _______

(dad)

____ / 3

21.

where ______

how _______

(why)

____ / 3

22.

July 4, 2001

7/4/01

(May 1, 2001 or 5/1/01)

____ / 3

23.

(The woman has a baby.)

____ / 5

24.

(Deb went to bed.)

____ / 4
SUBTOTAL

____ / 30

TOTAL

____ / 100

Adapted from The LaRue Reading Skills Assessment, created by Charles LaRue through a grant from the Minnesota Department of
Children Families and Learning under the supervision of the Minnesota Literacy Council. ©2001 MN Dept. of Children Families and Learning

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

72

Instructions for using the LaRue Reading Skills Assessment B
This assessment is given as a one-to-one interview with the student. To test the student,
read the following script, and point to the examples on the test page as appropriate.
Have your student point to the correct answer, say the correct answer aloud, or write the
correct answer on the test page as appropriate. Mark the correct score for each question
on this page as you give the test. Don’t correct the student. If they answer incorrectly,
just acknowledge their answer and ask the next question. You can repeat each question
or statement only once. If the student doesn’t understand, move to the next question.
Note on pronunciation: If the student’s answer is accented but comprehensible, give
them credit. If their answer is too accented to be understood by most people, do not give
them credit.
The questions are ordered in increasing difficulty within each section. If a student
cannot answer the first two questions in each section, there is no need to ask them
further questions in that section. Move on to the next section to find out if they are more
proficient in another area.
There are 4 sections to this test. Subtotal each section separately. When you have
finished testing, refer to the Scoring Guide for help in interpreting the test scores.
SECTION

Score

1.

“This is an o, and this is an o.” For each of the following letters ask, “What is
this?” Score one point for each letter identified correctly.

2.

“This is an a, and this is an a.” For each of the following letters ask, “What is
this?” Score one point for each letter identified correctly.

3.

“This is a h, and this is a h.” For each of the following letters ask, “What is
this?” Score one point for each letter identified correctly.

4.

“This is a c, and this is a d.” For the following three letters ask, “What is this?’
Then ask, “What letter is next?” Score one point for each letter identified correctly.

5.

“This letter is k, and this letter is l.” For the following three letters ask, “What’s
this letter?” Then ask, “What letter is next?” Score one point for each letter identified
correctly.

Section I Subtotal
6.

“This number is 2, and this number is 3.” For the following three numbers ask,
“What’s this number?” And then ask, “What number is next?” Score one point for
each of the numbers identified correctly.

7.

“This phone number is 362-9578. What is this phone number?” Score one point for
each of the numbers identified correctly.

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

73

8.

“This number is 33.” For the following four numbers ask, “What is this
number?” Score one point for each of the numbers identified correctly.

9.

“This price is $1.13.” For the following four prices ask, “What’s this price?”
“One thirteen” or “one dollar thirteen” are both acceptable answers. “One one three” is incorrect. Score
one point for each of the prices identified correctly.

10. “This time is one-fifteen.” For the following four times ask, “What’s this time?”
Score one point for each of the times identified correctly.

Section II Subtotal
11. “This word is pin.” For the next four words ask, “What’s this word?”
Score one point for each of the words identified correctly.

12. “This word is also pin.” For the next four words ask, “What’s this word?”
Score one point for each of the words identified correctly.

13. “This word is BIG.” For the next four words ask, “What’s this word?”
Score one point for each of the words identified correctly.

14. “This word is child.” For the next four words ask, “What’s this word?”
Score one point for each of the words identified correctly.

15. “This word is why.” For the next four words ask, “What’s this word?”
Score one point for each of the words identified correctly.

16. “This word is ten.” For the next four words ask, “What’s this word?”
Score one point for each of the words identified correctly.

Section III Subtotal
17. “Write your first name and your last name.” Score two points for each name spelled
correctly.
18. “This letter is c. Copy this letter. This letter is d. Copy this letter. This letter is
e. Copy this letter. Write the letter f.” Score 1 point for each letter correctly written. Score
half for wrong case.

19. “This letter is p. Copy this letter. This letter is q. Copy this letter. This letter is
r. Copy this letter. Write the letter s.” Score 1 point for each letter correctly written. Score
half for the wrong case

20. “This word is red. Copy this word. This word is fed. Copy this word. Write the
word bed.” Score one point for each word correctly written.
21. “This word is what. Copy this word. This word is why. Copy this word. Write
the word who.” Score one point for each word correctly written.
22. “This date is August 6th, 2001, and this date is 8/6/01. Write June 3rd, 2001.”
Score one point each for the day, month, and year correctly written. The student can use either format
for writing the date.

23. “Write this sentence: ‘Tim is in school.’” Score one point for each word written correctly.
24. “Write this sentence: ‘The little baby was good.’” Score one point for each word written
correctly.

Section IV Subtotal
TEST TOTAL
The LaRue Reading Skills Assessment was created by Charles LaRue through a grant from the Minnesota Department of Children
Families and Learning under the supervision of the Minnesota Literacy Council. ©2001 MN Dept. of Children Families and Learning

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

74

LaRue Reading Skills Assessment B
Name: _________________________________ Date: _________________

Section I

1.

O

O

F

E

B

T

H

2.

a

a

c

o

e

n

a

3.

h

H

k

t

M

T

b

4.

C

D

E

F

G

_____

5.

k

l

m

n

o

_____

3

4

5

6

____

162

300

Section II

6.

2

7.

362-9578

716-0543

8.

33

54

86

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

75

9.

$1.13

$2.99

$10.28

$38.94

$412.00

10.

1:15

7:30

4:03

11:15

6:45

Section III

11.

pin

tin

chin

win

fin

12.

pin

pit

pig

pick

pip

13.

BIG

BAG

BEG

BOG

BUG

14.

child

come

your

house

father

15.

why

how

where

when

what

16.

ten

three

one

six

thirteen

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

76

Section IV

17.

___________________ ____________________

18. C ____

D ____

E _____

______

19. p ____

q ____

r _____

______

20. red _________

fed _________

_________

21. what ________

why _________

_________

22. August 6, 2001

8/6/01 ___________________

23.

_________________________________________

24.

_________________________________________

Adapted from The LaRue Reading Skills Assessment, created by Charles LaRue through a grant from the Minnesota Department
of Children Families and Learning under the supervision of the Minnesota Literacy Council. ©2001 MN Dept. of Children
Families and Learning

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

77

Name __________________________ Date _____________

LaRue Reading Skills Assessment B – Scoring Page

SCORE

SECTION I – Tests the ability to recognize and name letters and knowledge of alphabetical order.
1.

O

O

F

E

B

T

H

____ / 5

2.

a

a

c

o

e

n

a

____ / 5

3.

h

H

k

t

M

T

b

____ / 5

4.

C

D

E

F

G

(H)

____ / 4

5.

k

l

m

n

o

(p )

____ / 4
SUBTOTAL

____ / 23

SECTION II – Tests the ability to name numbers, to read numbers as prices and times, and knowledge of numerical order.
6.

2

3

4

5

6

(7)

____ / 4

7.

362-9578

716-0543

8.

33

54

86

162

300

____ / 4

9.

$1.13

$2.99

$10.28

$38.94

$412.00

____ / 4

10.

1:15

7:30

4:03

11:15

6:45

____ / 4

____ / 7

SUBTOTAL

____ / 23

SECTION III – Tests knowledge of letter sounds for beginning and ending consonants, short vowels, and sight words.
11.

pin

tin

chin

win

fin

____ / 4

12.

pin

pit

pig

pick

pip

____ / 4

13.

BIG

BAG

BEG

BOG

BUG

____ / 4

14.

child

come

your

house

father

____ / 4

15.

why

how

where

when

what

____ / 4

16.

ten

three

one

six

thirteen

____ / 4
SUBTOTAL

____ / 24

SECTION IV – Tests the ability to copy and write letters, alphabetical order, write a date, write a sentence from dictation,
to spell phonetically and write sight words.

17.

(student first name)

(student last name)

____ / 4

18.

C ___

D ___

E ___

(F)

____ / 4

19.

p ___

q ___

r ___

(s)

____ / 4

20.

red _______

fed _______

(bed)

____ / 3

21.

what ______

why _______

(who)

____ / 3

22.

August 6, 2001

8/6/01

(June 3, 2001 or 6/3/01)

____ / 3

23.

(Tim is in school.)

____ / 4

24.

(The little baby was good.)

____ / 5
SUBTOTAL

____ / 30

TOTAL

____ / 100

Adapted from The LaRue Reading Skills Assessment, created by Charles LaRue through a grant from the Minnesota Department of Children
Families and Learning under the supervision of the Minnesota Literacy Council. ©2001 MN Dept. of Children Families and Learning

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

78

Instructions for using the LaRue Reading Skills Assessment C
This assessment is given as a one to one interview with the student. To test the student,
read the following script, and point to the examples on the test page as appropriate.
Have your student point to the correct answer, say the correct answer aloud, or write the
correct answer on the test page as appropriate. Mark the correct score for each question
on this page, as you give the test. Don’t correct the student, if they answer incorrectly,
just acknowledge their answer and ask the next question. You can repeat each question
or statement only once. If the student doesn’t understand, move to the next question.
Note on pronunciation: If the student’s answer is accented but comprehensible, give
them credit. If their answer is too accented to be understood by most people, do not give
them credit.
The questions are ordered in increasing difficulty within each section. If a student
cannot answer the first two questions in each section, there is no need to ask them
further questions in that section. Move on to the next section to find out if they are more
proficient in another area.
There are 4 sections to this test. Subtotal each section separately. When you have
finished testing, refer to the Scoring Guide for help in interpreting the test scores.
SECTION

Score

1. “This is an a, and this is an a.” For each of the following letters ask, “What is
this?” Score one point for each letter identified correctly.
2.

“This is an f, and this is an f.” For each of the following letters ask, “What is
this?” Score one point for each letter identified correctly.

3.

“This is a p, and this is a p.” For each of the following letters ask, “What is
this?” Score one point for each letter identified correctly.

4.

“This is a h, and this is an i.” For the following three letters ask, “What is this?’
Then ask, “What letter is next?” Score one point for each letter identified correctly.

5.

“This letter is p, and this letter is q.” For the following three letters ask,
“What’s this letter?” Then ask, “What letter is next?” Score one point for each letter
identified correctly.

Section I Subtotal
6.

“This number is 4, and this number is 5.” For the following three numbers ask,
“What’s this number?” And then ask, “What number is next?” Score one point for
each of the numbers identified correctly.

7.

“This phone number is 952-3678. What is this phone number?” Score one point for
each of the numbers identified correctly.

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

79

8.

“This number is 25.” For the following four numbers ask, “What is this
number?” Score one point for each of the numbers identified correctly.

9.

“This price is $2.54.” For the following four prices ask, “What’s this price?”
“Two fifty four” or “two dollars fifty four” are both acceptable answers. “Two five four” is incorrect.
Score one point for each of the prices identified correctly.

10. “This time is three-twenty.” For the following four times ask, “What’s this
time?” Score one point for each of the times identified correctly.
Section II Subtotal
11. “This word is pen.” For the next four words ask, “What’s this word?”
Score one point for each of the words identified correctly.

12. “This word is also pen.” For the next four words ask, “What’s this word?”
Score one point for each of the words identified correctly.

13. “This word is BIT.” For the next four words ask, “What’s this word?”
Score one point for each of the words identified correctly.

14. “This word is home.” For the next four words ask, “What’s this word?”
Score one point for each of the words identified correctly.

15. “This word is what.” For the next four words ask, “What’s this word?”
Score one point for each of the words identified correctly.

16. “This word is six.” For the next four words ask, “What’s this word?”
Score one point for each of the words identified correctly.

Section III Subtotal
17. “Write your first name and your last name.” Score two points for each name spelled
correctly.
18. “This letter is b. Copy this letter. This letter is c. Copy this letter. This letter is
d. Copy this letter. Write the letter e.” Score 1 point for each letter correctly written. Score
half for wrong case.

19. “This letter is m. Copy this letter. This letter is n. Copy this letter. This letter is
o. Copy this letter. Write the letter p.” Score 1 point for each letter correctly written. Score
half for the wrong case

20. “This word is tan. Copy this word. This word is pan. Copy this word. Write the
word man.” Score one point for each word correctly written.
21. “This word is when. Copy this word. This word is what. Copy this word. Write
the word where.” Score one point for each word correctly written.
22. “This date is May 5th, 2001, and this date is 5/5/01. Write April 6th, 2001.”
Score one point each for the day, month, and year correctly written. The student can use either format
for writing the date.

23. “Write this sentence: ‘Dad had a bad day.’” Score one point for each word written
correctly.

24. “Write this sentence: ‘She’s a pretty girl.’” Score one point for each word written
correctly.

Section IV Subtotal
TEST TOTAL
The LaRue Reading Skills Assessment was created by Charles LaRue through a grant from the Minnesota Department of Children
Families and Learning under the supervision of the Minnesota Literacy Council. ©2001 MN Dept. of Children Families and Learning

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

80

LaRue Reading Skills Assessment C
Name: _________________________________ Date: _________________

Section I

1.

A

A

E

P

H

B

F

2.

f

f

k

l

t

h

k

3.

p

p

g

d

a

q

b

4.

H

I

J

K

L

_____

5.

p

q

r

s

t

_____

5

6

7

8

_____

217

400

Section II

6.

4

7.

952-3678

763-1045

8.

25

42

63

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

81

9.

$2.54

$3.99

$12.25

$47.75

$236.00

10.

3:20

8:30

10:06

1:15

6:45

Section III

11.

pen

men

ten

den

hen

12.

pen

pet

peck

peg

pep

13.

BIT

BAT

BET

BUT

BOT

14.

home

some

know

girl

mother

15.

what

who

how

where

when

16.

six

four

seven

three

eleven

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

82

Section IV

17.

___________________ ____________________

18. B ____

C ____

D _____

______

19. m ____

n ____

o _____

______

20. tan _________

pan _________

_________

21. when ________

what _________

_________

22. May 5, 2001

5/5/01

___________________

23.

_________________________________________

24.

_________________________________________

Adapted from The LaRue Reading Skills Assessment, created by Charles LaRue through a grant from the Minnesota Department
of Children Families and Learning under the supervision of the Minnesota Literacy Council. ©2001 MN Dept. of Children
Families and Learning

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

83

Name __________________________ Date _____________

LaRue Reading Skills Assessment C – Scoring Page

SCORE

SECTION I – Tests the ability to recognize and name letters and knowledge of alphabetical order.
1.

A

A

E

P

H

B

F

____ / 5

2.

f

f

k

l

t

h

k

____ / 5

3.

p

p

g

d

a

q

b

____ / 5

4.

H

I

J

K

L

(M)

____ / 4

5.

p

q

r

s

t

(u )

____ / 4
SUBTOTAL

____ / 23

SECTION II – Tests the ability to name numbers, to read numbers as prices and times, and knowledge of numerical order.
6.

4

5

6

7

8

(9 )

____ / 4

7.

952-3678

763-1045

____ / 7

8.

25

42

63

217

400

____ / 4

9.

$2.54

$3.99

$12.25

$47.75

$236.00

____ / 4

10.

3:20

8:30

10:06

1:15

6:45

____ / 4
SUBTOTAL

____ / 23

SECTION III – Tests knowledge of letter sounds for beginning and ending consonants, short vowels, and sight words.
11.

pen

men

ten

den

hen

____ / 4

12.

pen

pet

peck

peg

pep

____ / 4

13.

BIT

BAT

BET

BUT

BOT

____ / 4

14.

home

some

know

girl

mother

____ / 4

15.

what

who

how

where

when

____ / 4

16.

six

four

seven

three

eleven

____ / 4
SUBTOTAL

____ / 24

SECTION IV – Tests the ability to copy and write letters, alphabetical order, write a date, write a sentence from dictation,
to spell phonetically and write sight words.

17.

(student first name)

(student last name)

____ / 4

18.

B ___

C ___

D ___

(E)

____ / 4

19.

m___

n ___

o ___

(p)

____ / 4

20.

tan _______

pan _______

(man)

____ / 3

21.

when ______

what ______

(where)

____ / 3

22.

May 5, 2001

5/5/01

(April 6, 2001 or 4/6/01)

____ / 3

23.

(Dad had a bad day.)

____ / 5

24.

(She’s a pretty girl.)

____ / 4
SUBTOTAL

____ / 30

TOTAL

____ / 100

Adapted from The LaRue Reading Skills Assessment, created by Charles LaRue through a grant from the Minnesota Department of Children
Families and Learning under the supervision of the Minnesota Literacy Council. ©2001 MN Dept. of Children Families and Learning

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

84

Contact Information
Mississippi Department of Education
Office of Elementary Education and Reading
Robin Lemonis
DIRECTOR OF STUDENT INTERVENTION SERVICES (PRE-K – 12)
rlemonis@mdek12.org
Monique Henderson
ENGLISH LEARNER SPECIALIST
mhenderson@mdek12.org
Sharon Prestridge
SPECIAL POPULATIONS COORDINATOR
sprestridge@mdek12.org
Tarro Funchess
TITLE III COORDINATOR
tfunchess@mdek12.org

English Learner (EL) – Administrator Resource Manual

85

