ELPA21 Insider Newsletter: Spring 2025 - ELPA21 Our Team News & Events Contact Us About ELPA21 Our Values Our Expertise Assessments Dynamic Screener ELPA21 Summative Alt ELPA Screener Alt ELPA Summative Professional Learning ELP Standards, Assessments, and Score Reports Differentiating Instruction for English/Multilingual Learners Formative Assessment for English/Multilingual Learners ELP Standards Resources Shop About ELPA21 Our Values Our Expertise Assessments Dynamic Screener ELPA21 Summative Alt ELPA Screener Alt ELPA Summative Professional Learning ELP Standards, Assessments, and Score Reports Differentiating Instruction for English/Multilingual Learners Formative Assessment for English/Multilingual Learners ELP Standards Resources Shop Search for: Close Search ELPA21 Insider Newsletter: Spring 2025 May 8, 2025 Welcome to our newest blog series: the ELPA21 Insider Newsletter! We’re excited to bring the latest news and updates—previously shared exclusively with our email subscribers—directly to our blog readers in this new format. If you’re not already subscribed to the email version of the ELPA21 Insider Newsletter, consider signing up! Email subscribers receive the newsletter four times a year (spring, summer, fall, and winter) and one month earlier than it appears on the blog. Plus, subscribers get access to additional content and giveaways not available to blog readers. However you choose to stay connected, we’re glad you’re here! ELPA21 Insider Newsletter Sign-up . ELPA21 Insider Newsletter – Spring 2025 Hello, ELPA21 Insiders! Welcome to our first newsletter of 2025—we’re glad to have you with us and excited to bring you the latest updates. In this edition of the ELPA21 Insider Newsletter, we’re showcasing our recent and upcoming conference appearances, announcing a restock of classroom resources from our partners at UCLA CRESST for Multilingual Learners, and highlighting a special collection of episodes from The ASSETS Podcast. Keep reading to find out more! ELPA21 on the Move: Conference Season is in Full Swing! From Left: Brooke and Joel at AMTESOL 2025 Temps outside may be warming up, but our conference season is already off to a hot start! ELPA21 was delighted to start the year at the Alabama-Mississippi TESOL (AMTESOL) Conference in historic Montgomery, Alabama. In addition to connecting with educators from our newest partner state, Mississippi, we were honored to observe Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.’s birthday in a city that played a pivotal role in his legacy and the American civil rights movement. Earlier this year, ELPA21 had the opportunity to present on family engagement and strengthening the home-school connection at the National ESEA Conference in Austin, Texas. From there, we traveled to Atlanta, Georgia, to sponsor and attend both the National Association for English Learner Program Administrators (NAELPA) and the National Association for Bilingual Education (NABE) annual conferences. Clockwise from Left: Laquita at NAELPA, Jobi addressing the NABE audience, phones out at NABE for an ELPA21 workshop We rounded out February with a trip to beautiful Eugene, Oregon, where we visited the Coalition of Oregon School Administrators (COSA) and connected with some of the incredible educators and EL program leaders in the Beaver State. In March, we attended the California Association for Bilingual Education (CABE) Conference in Long Beach, California, and in April, we participated in both the West Virginia TESOL Conference in Fairmont, West Virginia, and the National Council on Measurement in Education (NCME) Annual Meeting in Denver, Colorado. Clockwise from Top-Left: Dancers at CABE, Long Beach Convention Center all dolled up for CABE, Consuelo Castillo Kickbusch joins Jobi in session, Hollywood legend Edward James Olmos visits the CABE exhibit hall Coming up in June, ELPA21 will present three sessions at the National Conference on Student Assessment (NCSA) in Denver, Colorado, highlighting new research on English language proficiency assessment. Topics include using data to inform instruction, identifying students for alternate ELP screeners, and key considerations around test length. Check the conference schedule for full session details. All of us at ELPA21 are incredibly grateful for the opportunity to attend these important industry gatherings. Connecting with educators, administrators, and program leaders across the country not only allows us to network and gain insights to improve our assessments, but also gives us the chance to collaborate and support those working directly with multilingual learners. We look forward to continuing these conversations and strengthening our shared commitment to student success! Restocked and Ready: Explore the Latest Classroom Resources from UCLA CRESST for Multilingual Learners If you’re an EL educator looking to add the latest classroom resources to your toolkit, we have some great news. Our partners at UCLA CRESST for Multilingual Learners have announced a restock of their best-selling Differentiating Instruction for EL/MLs Flipbook and Formative Assessment Foldable! The Differentiating Instruction for EL/MLs Flipbook is an evergreen resource containing eight high-leverage strategies scaffolded for low, medium, and high language proficiency levels that are designed for immediate application. It also includes access to a free digital download of refillable strategy templates. The Formative Assessment Foldable is a practical tool designed to support educators through each stage of the formative assessment cycle. It highlights key components of effective formative assessment and provides actionable strategies for implementation with EL/ML students at various proficiency levels. All of the incredible resources for EL educators, including the foundational English Learner Educator Toolkit and the signature Differentiating for English/Multilingual Learners Poster, are available for purchase now. Visit shop.nabe.org for more information and follow UCLA CRESST for Multilingual Learners on social media to stay up-to-date on all the latest products and services. Stay Inspired with The ASSETS Podcast Have you heard the buzz? ASSETS is an original podcast series hosted by Dr. Jobi Lawrence that explores the educational realities of multilingual learners across the country. Each month, Dr. Lawrence welcomes a new guest with unique insight into serving our nation’s multilingual learners and their families. Available now is a special four-part collection where we hear ‘the voices of our students.’ In this unique set of episodes, Dr. Lawrence sits down with leaders, advocates, and former EL students who served on the Iowa Student Learning Institute’s ELL Leadership Team. You won’t want to miss these poignant and thought-provoking episodes! The ASSETS Podcast is available for free on Spotify and Apple Podcasts. Listen to The ASSETS Podcast on Spotify Listen to The ASSETS Podcast on Apple Podcasts Let’s Keep in Touch We deeply appreciate the work you do to support English learners, and we’re committed to being a resource for you. Stay up to date on the latest by bookmarking our website and following us on social media, and if you find this newsletter helpful, we hope you’ll share it with your colleagues. Your feedback helps us better support you, and we do our best to respond to every question and inquiry as quickly as possible. Check out the links below to stay connected! Quarterly Newsletter Sign-up Contact Us with Questions! Facebook X/Twitter LinkedIn YouTube Thank you! We’re grateful to be a part of your journey as an EL educator and want to send our best wishes to you, your students, and your colleagues for a strong finish to the 2024-25 school year. Thank you for joining us! Newsletter subscribers can look for the next installment of the ELPA21 Insider Newsletter in your email inbox just before the summer break! Email Subscribe --> Newsletter Signup ELPA21 Contact Us About ELPA21 Our Values Our Expertise Resources ELP Standards Professional Learning Shop © 2026 Regents of the University of California