LAS Links Assessment System
English Language Proficiency Test
Frequently Asked Questions
1. Who is an English learner?
The term “English learner,” when used with respect to an individual, means an individual
who is aged 3 through 21; who is enrolled or preparing to enroll in an elementary school
or secondary school; who was not born in the United States or whose native language
is a language other than English; who is a Native American or Alaska Native, or a
native resident of the outlying areas; and who comes from an environment where a
language other than English has had a significant impact on the individual's level of
English language proficiency; or who is migratory, whose native language is a language
other than English, and who comes from an environment where a language other than
English is dominant; and whose difficulties in speaking, reading, writing, or
understanding the English language may be sufficient to deny the individual the ability to
meet the challenging State academic standards; the ability to successfully achieve in
classrooms where the language of instruction is English; or the opportunity to
participate fully in society.
Reference: ESEA Section 8101(20)
2. Who is an English learner with a disability?
The phrase “English learners with disabilities” refers to English learners who are also
“children with disabilities” under the IDEA.
References: ESEA Section 3201(4) page 212
IDEA Section 300.8 Child with a Disability 34 CFR §300.8
82 FR 31912
3. What is the English Language Proficiency Test?
The English Language Proficiency Test (ELPT) is a secure, large-scale, English
language proficiency test administered to Kindergarten through grade 12 students who
have been officially identified as English learners (EL). This assessment is administered
annually in the Spring to monitor each English learner’s progress in acquiring academic
English. As mandated by the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA), the
students are tested in the domains of Listening, Speaking, Reading, and Writing.
https://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/oela/english-learner-toolkit/eltoolkit.pdf
4. Can a parent of an English learner request that the student not take the English
Language Proficiency Test?

The Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA) requires that the Local
Education Agency (LEA) must assess all ELs using the annual English language
proficiency assessment, including those students whose parents have declined to enroll
them in, or had them removed from, Language Instruction Education Programs (LIEPs).
All ELs enrolled in schools served by the State must be assessed annually using the
State’s English language proficiency assessment. (ESEA Section 1111(b)(2)(G)). State
or district assessment policies, if they include a right to opt a child out of assessments,
do not override or diminish the LEA’s obligation to assess 100 percent of ELs using the
annual English language proficiency assessment.
https://www2.ed.gov/policy/elsec/leg/essa/essatitleiiiguidenglishlearners92016.pdf
(page 30)
5. If an EL has opted out of the EL program or EL services, is the student required
take the annual ELPT?
Parents have the right to opt their children out of EL programs or particular EL services.
If a parent decides to opt his or her child out of an EL program or particular EL services,
that child still retains his or her status as an EL. English learners who opt out of EL
services or program must, like those receiving programs or services, take the English
Language Proficiency Test once per year until they officially exit EL status. There is no
ELPT exemption for ELs who do not receive EL services.
https://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/oela/english-learner-toolkit/chap7.pdf
6. Is it necessary to administer the placement test to a student based on the other
languages spoken in the home rather than the language used by the student?
Per the U. S. Department of Education English Learner Tool Kit, one of the important
questions on the Home Language Survey (HLS) is “What is the primary language used
in the home, regardless of the language spoken by the student?”
7. What is the criteria for students with a significant cognitive disability (SCD)?
Significant cognitive disability (SCD) is determined by the IEP team, marked on the IEP,
and recorded in the MSIS. All three of the following criteria must be met: (1) The
student has been classified as an English Learner. (2) The student has a significant
cognitive disability (SCD) and is receiving education services under IDEA. (3) The
student is working in an alternate curriculum aligned with the state’s academic
standards and is participating in the alternate Mississippi Academic Assessment
Program.
8. Will the teachers be able to test students in more than one setting?
Students from different grades can take the online test simultaneously. The
recommendation is that students are grouped by grade band (K-1, 2-3, 4-5, 6-8, 9-12).

9. How many teachers need to be in the room when giving the LAS Links
assessment?
One test administrator (a licensed educator) and one proctor need to be in the testing
room for the annual assessment. The test must be administered by a licensed educator.
10. Does the test have immediate break-up in case of an emergency stoppage?
The LAS Links has a pause test feature for students who need to pause the test for
such cases. If you log-out, then you can later log back into the test again with the same
login and password to resume testing.
11. Is there an updated list of accommodations available for LAS Links?
English learners will follow the accommodations in the Mississippi Testing
Accommodations Manual (July 2022) for the ELPT.
12. Will the Parent Report and the Student Report for the ELPT be available with
templates in other languages?
The Parent/Home report provides a home report in Spanish. Per the U.S. Department
of Education English Learner Tool Kit, “If a written translation is not provided, an oral
interpretation should be made available whenever needed.”
13. What is monitored status?
The English learner moves to monitored status when he or she has officially exited the
program based on the Mississippi exit criteria. The student will no longer receive EL
accommodations and will remain in this status for four (4) years. The student in
monitored status does not take the English Language Proficiency Test.
14. What is the criteria to officially exit a student from the English learner status?
The English Language Proficiency Test (ELPT) score requirements for English learners
to officially exit EL status is listed below. The student is required to obtain the following
proficiency levels on the ELPT:
a) Overall Proficiency Level 4 or 5, and
b) Reading Proficiency Level 4 or 5, and
c) Writing Proficiency Level 4 or 5.
15. What are the ramifications of exiting an EL student too early or too late?
Exiting EL students either too soon or too late raises civil rights concerns. EL students
who are exited too soon are denied access to EL services. EL students who are exited

too late may be denied access to parts of the general curriculum. Denied or delayed
access to the general curriculum can impede academic growth and contribute to a
higher risk of dropping out of school.
https://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/oela/english-learner-toolkit/chap8.pdf (page 2)
16. Can educators exit an EL with a disability from EL services so that the student
does not have to take the ELP assessment?
According to federal guidance, ELs with disabilities must continue to be identified as
ELs until they achieve proficiency in English. IDEA legislation does not permit removal
of a students’ EL status before he or she has attained English proficiency.
17. Where can I find additional resource information regarding English learners?
The English Learner Tool Kit has ten (10) chapters (updated with ESSA references),
and contains an overview, sample tools, and resources.
https://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/oela/english-learner-toolkit/index.ht

