Mississippi Licensure Pathways – Educator Licensure Search for: News Reports & Data Directory A-Z Index Shortcuts Academic Standards Accountability Accreditation Licensure MSIS MECCA Home News Reports & Data Menu Families Help Your Child Become a Strong Reader Know Your K-3 Child’s Reading Score Graduation Requirements School and District Report Cards Administrators Accreditation Standards District and School Performance MS Student Information System (MSIS) Overview Federal Programs Special Education Teachers Mississippi College and Career and Readiness Standards Licensure Student Assessment Professional Development A-Z Index Directory Office Directory A-Z Index Search for: Mississippi Licensure Pathways Traditional Route Pathway Description: Prospective educators can earn an undergraduate degree in education from a college or school of education in Mississippi. Each program provides the knowledge, skills, and student-teacher experience to teach elementary, middle, or high school in Mississippi. Educator Preparation Providers Steps: Complete student teaching Earn a four-year education degree that leads to licensure Successfully complete State Board of Education-approved licensure assessment(s) Obtain an online recommendation from your institution Apply for a license Applicants can submit requests for licensure online through the Mississippi Educator Career Continuum Archive ( MECCA ) system. MECCA is the fastest, most secure way to submit your application and supporting documents to the Division of Educator Licensure. Your educator management account will provide you with your Educator ID number and allow you to upload certain documents for your application. After you start an application, the system will produce a built-in checklist of elements required for licensure according to the selected application category. License Details: Five-year validity Renewable Can be upgraded to a higher-class level Additional endorsements can be added by an acceptable coursework credit hours option, completion of an approved program, or by obtaining a passing score on an MBE-approved licensure subject assessment Transferable between districts or eligible nonpublic schools Resources: Please review our Document Submission webpage for additional information required for successful retrieval of official transcripts and official Mississippi assessments. For current licensure requirements, please review the Guidelines for Mississippi Educator Licensure K-12 . For the most up-to-date test information, please view the licensure guidelines or visit the following website(s): Mississippi Praxis Website Mississippi Foundations of Reading Alternate Route Pathway Description: Prospective educators who hold a (non-education) bachelor’s degree can complete an approved alternate route program in education from a college or school of education in Mississippi. Each program provides the knowledge, skills and supervised internship experience to teach elementary, middle, or high school in Mississippi. Educator Preparation Providers Steps: Hold a four-year degree in non-education Successfully complete State Board of Education-approved licensure assessment(s) Complete the Mississippi alternate route program requirements Obtain an online recommendation from your institution Apply for a license Applicants can submit requests for licensure online through the Mississippi Educator Career Continuum Archive ( MECCA ) system. MECCA is the fastest, most secure way to submit your application and supporting documents to the Division of Educator Licensure. Your educator management account will provide you with your Educator ID number and allow you to upload certain documents for your application. After you start an application, the system will produce a built-in checklist of elements required for licensure according to the selected application category. License Details: Initial license issued is a provisional non-renewable license (length of provisional license may vary based on the alternate route program) The standard license has a five-year validity cycle Five-year renewable license can be upgraded to a higher-class level Additional endorsements can be added by an acceptable coursework credit hours option, completion of an approved program, or by obtaining a passing score on an MBE-approved licensure subject assessment Transferable between districts or eligible nonpublic schools Special Note: The initial alternate route license is issued as a one-year or three-year nonrenewable license and must be converted by meeting the current five-year licensure requirements. Resources: Please review our Document Submission webpage for additional information required for successful retrieval of official transcripts and official Mississippi assessments. For current licensure requirements, please review our Guidelines for Mississippi Educator Licensure K-12 . For the most up-to-date test information, please view the licensure guidelines or visit the following website(s): Mississippi Praxis Website Mississippi Foundations of Reading Career and Technical Education Description: Prospective educators who hold an associate degree or higher can complete license-specific requirements to teach occupational or technical subjects. Research and Curriculum Unit at Mississippi State University Steps: Hold an associate’s or higher degree in a career-oriented or technical subject or already hold a Mississippi teaching license Successfully complete State Board of Education licensure requirements Apply for a license Applicants can submit requests for licensure online through the Mississippi Educator Career Continuum Archive ( MECCA ) system. MECCA is the fastest, most secure way to submit your application and supporting documents to the Division of Educator Licensure. Your educator management account will provide you with your Educator ID number and allow you to upload certain documents for your application. After you start an application, the system will produce a built-in checklist of elements required for licensure according to the selected application category. License Details: Three-year nonrenewable or five-year renewable Five-year renewable license can be upgraded to a higher-class level Additional endorsements can be added to the five-year renewable license by an acceptable coursework credit hours option, completion of an approved program, or by obtaining a passing score on an MBE-approved licensure subject assessment Five-year renewable license transferable between districts or eligible nonpublic schools Special Note: If the applicant meets all requirements, that applicant will be issued a five-year license. If the applicant meets the educational and occupational experience requirements, but does not meet all other requirements, the applicant may be issued one (1) three-year endorsement (license), and all requirements stated above must be satisfied prior to the ending date of that license. Resources: The Division of Educator Licensure accepts degrees or coursework from any nationally or regionally accredited institution. An institution’s accreditation status can be verified using the United States Department of Education website ( https://www.ed.gov/accreditation ) or the Council on Higher Education Accreditation website ( https://www.chea.org/ ). Please review our Document Submission webpage for additional information required for successful retrieval of official transcripts. For current licensure requirements, please review our Career and Technical Education Guidelines . Out-of-State (Reciprocity) Pathway Description: The department shall grant a standard five-year license to any individual with a valid standard renewable license from another state. Individuals who do not hold a standard renewable license may qualify for a two-year provisional reciprocity license. Steps: Hold a valid, standard renewable out-of-state teaching license (standard renewable or less than standard, as applicable). Apply for a license. Applicants may submit requests for licensure online through the Mississippi Educator Career Continuum Archive (MECCA) system. MECCA is the fastest and most secure way to submit your application and supporting documents to the Division of Educator Licensure. Your educator management account will provide you with your Educator ID number and allow you to upload required documentation. Once an application is initiated, the system will generate a built-in checklist outlining all required elements based on the selected application category. License Details (Five-Year Reciprocity License): Five-year validity Renewable Can be upgraded to a higher-class level Additional endorsements may be added by an acceptable coursework credit hours option, completion of an approved program, or by obtaining a passing score on an MBE-approved licensure subject assessment Transferable between school districts or eligible nonpublic schools License Details (Two-Year Reciprocity License): Two-year validity Non-renewable Can be upgraded to a higher-class level Additional endorsements may only be added to a five-year standard renewable license issued via Reciprocity by successful completion of requirements as approved by the Mississippi State Board of Education Transferable between school districts or eligible nonpublic schools Resources: The Division of Educator Licensure accepts degrees or coursework from any nationally or regionally accredited institution. An institution’s accreditation status can be verified using the United States Department of Education website ( https://www.ed.gov/accreditation ) or the Council on Higher Education Accreditation website ( https://www.chea.org/ ). Please review our Document Submission webpage for additional information required for successful retrieval of official transcripts. For current licensure requirements, please review our Guidelines for Mississippi Educator Licensure K-12 . Out-of-State Program Completers Pathway Description: Prospective and practicing educators seeking to obtain licensure in the state of Mississippi by way of completion of a traditional state-approved or nationally accredited licensure-track teacher, administrator, certain supplemental service provider, and supplemental endorsement preparation program from a regionally/nationally accredited institution of higher education program outside of Mississippi. Educator Preparation Providers Steps: Complete a traditional licensure preparation program outside of Mississippi Obtain an Institutional Program Verification Form (IPV) from the educator preparation provider in the state where the preparation occurred Successfully complete State Board of Education-approved licensure assessment(s) after the Institutional Program Verification (IPV) form has been verified by a licensure specialist Apply for a license Applicants can submit requests for licensure online through the Mississippi Educator Career Continuum Archive ( MECCA ) system. MECCA is the fastest, most secure way to submit your application and supporting documents to the Division of Educator Licensure. Your educator management account will provide you with your Educator ID number and allow you to upload certain documents for your application. After you start an application, the system will produce a built-in checklist of elements required for licensure according to the selected application category. License Details: Five-year validity Renewable Can be upgraded to a higher-class level Additional endorsements can be added by an acceptable coursework credit hours option, completion of an approved program, or by obtaining a passing score on an MBE-approved licensure subject assessment Transferable between districts or eligible nonpublic schools Resources: The Division of Educator Licensure accepts degrees or coursework from any nationally or regionally accredited institution. An institution’s accreditation status can be verified using the United States Department of Education website ( https://www.ed.gov/accreditation ) or the Council on Higher Education Accreditation website ( https://www.chea.org/ ). Please review our Document Submission webpage for additional information required for successful retrieval of official transcripts. For current licensure requirements, please review our Guidelines for Mississippi Educator Licensure K-12 . For the most up-to-date test information, please view the licensure guidelines or visit the following website(s): Mississippi Praxis Website Mississippi Foundations of Reading Educator Licensure 601-359-3483 Staff Search Contents Licensure Updates Mississippi Educator License Guide MECCA Account Registration User Guide TeachMS | Pathways to Teaching in Mississippi Resources AIM Institute | Pathway to Proficient Reading Driver’s Education Licensure Information Educator Misconduct Educator Preparation Providers Expert Citizen License Educator Licensure Guidelines K12 Licensure Commission New Course/Work Area Code Catalogs Performance-Based Licensure Document District Resources 2025-26 Administrator Calendar: Dates to Remember July 2025 - June 2026 2025-26 MDE Services Guidebook GoSignMeUp Registration Public APA Notices Career Opportunities Privacy Statement Public Meetings RFP/RFQ/RFA/Invitation to Bid No-Cost Contract Bid Opportunities Related MDE Sites EdUpdate Newsletter MS Instructional Materials Matter MS Succeeds Report Card Strong Readers Strong Leaders TeachMS Employees Cloud Services MDE Email Report Fraud, Waste & Abuse Mississippi Department of Education 359 N. West St. P.O. Box 771 Jackson, MS 39205-0771 Educator Licensure: 601-359-3483 General Information: 601-359-3513 Copyright 2025