The Arkansas Teaching Standards
The Arkansas Department of Education has adopted the 2011 Model Core Teaching Standards
developed by Interstate Teacher Assessment and Support Consortium (InTASC) to replace the
Arkansas Standards for Beginning Teachers (1995). InTASC is a program of the Council of
Chief State School Officers (CCSSO).These new Arkansas Teaching Standards are to be used
in identifying competencies for all teachers and for advising teacher preparation programs in all
Arkansas colleges and universities.
The standards have been grouped into four general categories to help users organize their
thinking about the standards (Model Core Teaching Standards: A Resource for State Dialog,
InTASC, 2011):

The Learner and Learning
Teaching begins with the learner. To ensure that each student learns new knowledge and skills,
teachers must understand that learning and developmental patterns vary among individuals, that
learners bring unique individual differences to the learning process, and that learners need
supportive and safe learning environments to thrive. Effective teachers have high expectations
for each and every learner and implement developmentally appropriate, challenging learning
experiences within a variety of learning environments that help all learners meet high standards
and reach their full potential. Teachers do this by combining a base of professional knowledge,
including an understanding of how cognitive, linguistic, social, emotional, and physical
development occurs, with the recognition that learners are individuals who bring differing
personal and family backgrounds, skills, abilities, perspectives, talents and interests. Teachers
collaborate with learners, colleagues, school leaders, families, members of the learners’
communities, and community organizations to better understand their students and maximize
their learning. Teachers promote learners’ acceptance of responsibility for their own learning and
collaborate with them to ensure the effective design and implementation of both self-directed and
collaborative learning.
Standard #1: Learner Development. The teacher understands how learners grow and
develop, recognizing that patterns of learning and development vary individually within and
across the cognitive, linguistic, social, emotional, and physical areas, and designs and
implements developmentally appropriate and challenging learning experiences.
Standard #2: Learning Differences. The teacher uses understanding of individual
differences and diverse cultures and communities to ensure inclusive learning environments
that enable each learner to meet high standards.
Standard #3: Learning Environments. The teacher works with others to create
environments that support individual and collaborative learning, and that encourage positive
social interaction, active engagement in learning, and self-motivation.

Content
Teachers must have a deep and flexible understanding of their content areas and be able to draw
upon content knowledge as they work with learners to access information, apply knowledge in
real world settings, and address meaningful issues to assure learner mastery of the content.
1

Today’s teachers make content knowledge accessible to learners by using multiple means of
communication, including digital media and information technology. They integrate crossdisciplinary skills (e.g., critical thinking, problem solving, creativity, communication) to help
learners use content to propose solutions, forge new understandings, solve problems, and
imagine possibilities. Finally, teachers make content knowledge relevant to learners by
connecting it to local, state, national, and global issues.
Standard #4: Content Knowledge. The teacher understands the central concepts, tools of
inquiry, and structures of the discipline(s) he or she teaches and creates learning experiences
that make the discipline accessible and meaningful for learners to assure mastery of the
content.
Standard #5: Application of Content. The teacher understands how to connect concepts
and use differing perspectives to engage learners in critical thinking, creativity, and
collaborative problem solving related to authentic local and global issues.

Instructional Practice
Effective instructional practice requires that teachers understand and integrate assessment,
planning, and instructional strategies in coordinated and engaging ways. Beginning with their
end or goal, teachers first identify student learning objectives and content standards and align
assessments to those objectives. Teachers understand how to design, implement and interpret
results from a range of formative and summative assessments. This knowledge is integrated into
instructional practice so that teachers have access to information that can be used to provide
immediate feedback to reinforce student learning and to modify instruction. Planning focuses on
using a variety of appropriate and targeted instructional strategies to address diverse ways of
learning, to incorporate new technologies to maximize and individualize learning, and to allow
learners to take charge of their own learning and do it in creative ways.
Standard #6: Assessment. The teacher understands and uses multiple methods of
assessment to engage learners in their own growth, to monitor learner progress, and to guide
the teacher’s and learner’s decision making.
Standard #7: Planning for Instruction. The teacher plans instruction that supports every
student in meeting rigorous learning goals by drawing upon knowledge of content areas,
curriculum, cross-disciplinary skills, and pedagogy, as well as knowledge of learners and the
community context.
Standard #8: Instructional Strategies. The teacher understands and uses a variety of
instructional strategies to encourage learners to develop deep understanding of content areas
and their connections, and to build skills to apply knowledge in meaningful ways.

Professional Responsibility
Creating and supporting safe, productive learning environments that result in learners achieving
at the highest levels is a teacher’s primary responsibility. To do this well, teachers must engage
in meaningful and intensive professional learning and self-renewal by regularly examining
practice through ongoing study, self-reflection, and collaboration. A cycle of continuous selfimprovement is enhanced by leadership, collegial support, and collaboration. Active engagement
in professional learning and collaboration results in the discovery and implementation of better

2

practice for the purpose of improved teaching and learning. Teachers also contribute to
improving instructional practices that meet learners’ needs and accomplish their school’s mission
and goals. Teachers benefit from and participate in collaboration with learners, families,
colleagues, other school professionals, and community members. Teachers demonstrate
leadership by modeling ethical behavior, contributing to positive changes in practice, and
advancing their profession.
Standard #9: Professional Learning and Ethical Practice. The teacher engages in ongoing
professional learning and uses evidence to continually evaluate his/her practice, particularly
the effects of his/her choices and actions on others (learners, families, other professionals,
and the community), and adapts practice to meet the needs of each learner.
Standard #10: Leadership and Collaboration. The teacher seeks appropriate leadership
roles and opportunities to take responsibility for student learning, to collaborate with
learners, families, colleagues, other school professionals, and community members to ensure
learner growth, and to advance the profession.

3

