English Learners | Ohio Department of Education and Workforce Skip to content Skip to main content Login | State Agencies | Employees Alerts Facebook Twitter Instagram LinkedIn YouTube Follow Home Administrators Opens menu. Superintendents Principals Treasurers Teachers Parents Topics Opens menu. Career Tech Chronic Absenteeism Community Schools Data Early Learning EMIS Federal Programs Finance & Funding Graduation Requirements Gifted Education Integrated Student Supports Learning in Ohio Literacy Research, Evaluation and Advanced Analytics Report Card Resources School and District Improvement School Transportation Special Education STEM Education Student Wellness and Success Testing Ohio's Education Options Other Resources How Do I? Opens menu. Get my Adult Diploma? Find Ohio's Learning Standards? View and compare district report cards? Graduate from High School? Understand the different school options? Find sample test questions? Use research and data to answer questions about education? Contact my Area Coordinator? Find more About Media Blog ---> Contact English Learners English Learners Home > Student Supports > English Learners How Do I? + Identify an English language learner? Use funding for English learners? Contact Information 614-387-2245 lau@education.ohio.gov Ohio schools currently serve over 80,000 students who are English learners. Spanish is the home or primary language of about one-third of the state's English learners. Somali, Arabic, Swahili, Chinese, Japanese, Nepali, Pennsylvania Dutch, French, Turkish, and over 90 other languages are also spoken by Ohio's English learners. Federal law requires Ohio schools to identify English learners, assess their English language proficiency, provide reasonable accommodations, monitor their academic progress, and implement accountability systems. To access the most recent state-level enrollment data on English learners, visit the Department's Report Portal and click the "Enrollment" tile on the left side of the screen. English Learner Programs Enrollment Identification, Reclassification & Monitoring Students and Families Funding Advancing Ohio's English Learners The Ohio Department of Education and Workforce convenes a collaborative group with a shared goal of improving educational programs for English learners. For more information, visit the Ohio English Learner Advisory Committee webpage. Ohio Department of Education and Workforce Stephen D. Dackin , Director 25 South Front Street, Columbus, Ohio 43215 1-877-644-6338 contact.center@education.ohio.gov Mike DeWine, Governor Privacy Site Map Ohio Checkbook Sign-up for Alerts The Ohio Department of Education and Workforce is an equal opportunity employer and provider of ADA services. The Department's Notices of Non-Discrimination applies to all programs and activities. Desktop View
