Higher Education
Teacher Preparation
Standards
 English for Speakers of Other Languages (ESOL)
 Grades K-6, 5-8, 6-12, and PreK-12




                    Kansas leads the world in the success of each student.

                                                                MONTH YEAR
ENGLISH FOR SPEAKERS OF OTHER LANGUAGES (ESOL) GRADES K-6, 5-8, 6-12 AND PREK-12




ENGLISH FOR SPEAKERS OF OTHER LANGUAGES
(ESOL)
K-6, 5-8, 6-12, PreK-12

The Kansas State Board of Education adopted new English for Speakers of Other
Languages (ESOL) preparation program standards on May 09, 2017.

Learner(s) is defined as children including those with disabilities or exceptionalities,
who are gifted, and students who represent diversity based on ethnicity, race,
socioeconomic status, gender, language, religion, and geographic origin.

Standard 1: Language as a System
Candidates demonstrate knowledge of language as a system, including phonology,
morphology, syntax, pragmatics and semantics, in order to support ELLs as they acquire
receptive and productive skills, English language proficiency and literacy in the content
areas.

    Function 1: Knowledge of the Phonological System
       Content Knowledge
       1.1.1 CK Candidates know the order of acquisition of phonemes (consonants
           and vowels). For example, stops are acquired before fricatives, etc.
           Candidates have knowledge of phonological concepts such as stress
           patterns, intonation, English syllabic and phonological structures, etc.
       1.1.2 CK Candidates know phonological processes such as “stopping”,
           consonant cluster reductions, phonotactic constraints from one language to
           another, etc.
       Professional Skills
       1.1.3 PS Candidates use their knowledge of different languages’ phonological
           systems and it is reflected in their planning and instruction. They are able to
           analyze ELs’ speech as they develop their proficiency in language and
           content.
       1.1.4 PS Candidates use appropriate methodologies in planning and instruction
           to develop the phonological competence of their ELs through the use of
           students’ L1 phonological knowledge and the transfer to language
           development and academic learning.




Kansas State Department of Education | www.ksde.gov
                                                                                             2
ENGLISH FOR SPEAKERS OF OTHER LANGUAGES (ESOL) GRADES K-6, 5-8, 6-12 AND PREK-12



    Function 2: Knowledge of the Morphological System.
       Content Knowledge
       1.2.1 CK Candidates know how words are formed in the English language and
           are able to conduct morphological analyses. Candidates know morphological
           processes and word structure.
       Professional Skills
       1.2.2 PS Candidates use students’ L1 morphological processes to communicate
           similarities and differences between it and English morphological processes
           and word structure. They are able to teach and develop ELs content
           vocabulary as a system.

    Function 3: Have knowledge of the Semantic System.
       Content Knowledge
       1.3.1 CK Candidates know the semantic system including concepts, order of
           acquisition, and are able to identify semantic processes at both the word and
           sentence level.
       Professional Skills
       1.3.2 PS Candidates observe students’ semantic processes and how culture and
           L1 influences concept development in L2. They use effective techniques and
           brain-based methodologies to teach content-specific vocabulary and lexical
           items that allow ELs to develop their cognitive academic proficiency skills at
           the word and sentence levels.

    Function 4: Knowledge of the Syntactic Structure of the English Language.
       Content Knowledge
       1.4.1 CK Candidates know the order of acquisition and concepts related to
           syntax and are able to identify syntactic structures.
       1.4.2 CK Candidates know the importance of linguistic and curriculum analysis
           to identify language functions and how they are expressed through specific
           structures and lexical items (content vocabulary).
       Professional Skills
       1.4.3 PS Candidates conduct linguistical analysis to identify key structures that
           express target language functions in the various content areas. They identify
           students’ L1 syntactical influences to scaffold students’ acquisition and
           concepts in the English language.
       1.4.4 PS Candidates are able to conduct linguistic and curriculum analysis of
           content-area text and language demands and identify the target language
           functions and structures that express them. Knowledge acquired is used to
           provide appropriate content and language instruction for students based on
           their L2 proficiency.
Kansas State Department of Education | www.ksde.gov
                                                                                        3
ENGLISH FOR SPEAKERS OF OTHER LANGUAGES (ESOL) GRADES K-6, 5-8, 6-12 AND PREK-12



    Function 5: Knowledge of the pragmatic and sociolinguistics of the English
    Language.
       Content Knowledge
       1.5.1 CK Candidates know concepts in the area of pragmatics and
           sociolinguistics.
       Professional Skills
       1.5.2 PS Candidates use research-based strategies and techniques to help ELs
           develop their pragmatic and sociolinguistic competence to use language
           appropriately in various social and academic contexts and purposes. They
           model appropriate and correct use of language in various contexts and for
           various pragmatic purposes.




Kansas State Department of Education | www.ksde.gov
                                                                                       4
ENGLISH FOR SPEAKERS OF OTHER LANGUAGES (ESOL) GRADES K-6, 5-8, 6-12 AND PREK-12



Standard 2: Language Acquisition and Development
Candidates know theories and research in language acquisition, including the role native
literacy plays in SLA, and apply appropriate instructional strategies for effectively increasing
English language proficiency and literacy in the content areas.

    Function 1: Candidates know major First and Second Language Acquisition (SLA)
    theories.
       Content Knowledge
       2.1.1 CK Candidates know the limitations as well as strengths of major research
           theories of second language acquisition.
       Professional Skills
       2.1.2 PS Candidates are able to demonstrate their understanding of SLA from a
           critical perspective by designing developmentally-appropriate instruction and
           assessment of language and core academic content for ELLs.

    Function 2: Candidates understand the role of native language literacy in SLA.
       Content Knowledge
       2.2.1 CK Candidates know the influence of native language literacy skills in the
           development of SLA.
       Professional Skills
       2.2.2 PS Candidates collect information regarding native language literacy and
           use this knowledge in their planning, instruction, and assessment of ELL
           students. Candidates encourage parents and caregivers of ELs to strengthen
           development of native language literacy to support SLA.

    Function 3: Candidates know the stages of second language acquisition.
       Content Knowledge
       2.3.1 CK Candidates know the stages of second language development and the
           characteristics related to each stage.
       Professional Skills
       2.3.2 PS Candidates reflect knowledge of second language development in their
           planning, instruction, and assessment of ELL students by using
           developmentally-appropriate language to make the core content accessible
           to ELs.




Kansas State Department of Education | www.ksde.gov
                                                                                                   5
ENGLISH FOR SPEAKERS OF OTHER LANGUAGES (ESOL) GRADES K-6, 5-8, 6-12 AND PREK-12



Standard 3: Role of Culture in Student Learning
Candidates demonstrate knowledge of the cultural dynamics of themselves, individual
learners, school, and community and their influence on classroom practice and
learning.

    Function 1: Candidates know the cultural pluralism of the United States and can
    identify similarities and differences within those cultures.
       Content Knowledge
       3.1.1 CK Candidates know the history of and perspectives toward various
           cultures and the implications on educational policies and practice.
       Professional Skills
       3.1.2 PS Candidates use their knowledge of cultural pluralism to evaluate
           current curricular and instructional practices.

    Function 2: Candidates know how the cultural dynamics of themselves, individual
    learners, school, and community influence teaching and learning.
       Content Knowledge
       3.2.1 CK Candidates know and can identify cultural factors and how they
           influence language development, cognitive processing and academic
           achievement.
       Professional Skills
       3.2.2 PS Candidates document the unique cultural characteristics of the learner
           and utilize these for planning, delivering and assessing instruction.




Kansas State Department of Education | www.ksde.gov
                                                                                         6
ENGLISH FOR SPEAKERS OF OTHER LANGUAGES (ESOL) GRADES K-6, 5-8, 6-12 AND PREK-12



Standard 4: Planning Instruction
Candidates have knowledge and understanding of research-based pedagogy for the
differentiation of classroom instruction in order to meet grade-level content and language
standards.

    Function 1: The candidate remains current on research-based practices and
    strategies to accelerate language and academic learning.
        Content Knowledge
        4.1.1 CK Candidates know how to write clear objectives that are appropriate for
            developmental levels and levels of language proficiency to meet core content
            standards.
        4.1.2 CK Candidates know developmentally-appropriate, meaningful activities
            that are relevant to their EL students and aligned with core content
            standards, ESOL standards and their instructional objectives.
        Professional Skills
        4.1.3 PS Candidates write clear developmentally-appropriate instructional
            objectives that are aligned with core content standards and ESOL standards
            and reflect the SLA developmental stages of their ELs.
        4.1.4 PS Candidates design developmentally-appropriate, meaningful, and
            relevant activities that are aligned with core content standards, ESOL
            standards, and their instructional objectives. The activities reflect the SLA
            developmental stages of their ELs and their linguistic and cultural diversity.

    Function 2: Candidates reflect on the language proficiency of the EL and how they
    will meet the objective and core content standards.
        Content Knowledge
        4.2.1 CK Candidates identify content knowledge and procedural skills embedded
            in core content standards. They accumulate research-based strategies that
            are appropriate for ELs’ varying levels of language proficiency.
        Professional Skills
        4.2.1 PS Candidates write lessons using research-based strategies to help
            scaffold and differentiate instruction for varying levels of ELs and reflect on
            the success of this for all learners.

    Function 3: Creation of supportive social and academic classroom ecology (the
    structure, arrangement and events that influence the action and reactions in the
    classroom).




Kansas State Department of Education | www.ksde.gov
                                                                                             7
ENGLISH FOR SPEAKERS OF OTHER LANGUAGES (ESOL) GRADES K-6, 5-8, 6-12 AND PREK-12



         Content Knowledge
         4.3.1 CK Candidates know each student, and how the structure, arrangement,
             human interaction and events influence the action and reactions in the
             classroom.
         Professional Skills
         4.3.2 PS Candidates plan and create a classroom ecology that builds on the
             potential of learners by setting conditions that engage and support student
             social and academic success.

    Function 4: Acquire appropriate resources to facilitate student learning and
    mastery of grade level content and language standards.
       Content Knowledge
       4.4.1 CK Candidates know the resources available and can determine their
           appropriate use to facilitate student learning and mastery of grade level
           content and language standards.
       Professional Skills
       4.4.2 PS Candidates select appropriate resources that best support student
           learning and mastery of grade level content and language standards as
           evidenced in lesson planning.




Kansas State Department of Education | www.ksde.gov
                                                                                           8
ENGLISH FOR SPEAKERS OF OTHER LANGUAGES (ESOL) GRADES K-6, 5-8, 6-12 AND PREK-12



Standard 5: Implementing Instruction
Candidates know and effectively implement a variety of research-based pedagogy for the
differentiation of classroom instruction in order to meet grade-level content and language
standards.

    Function 1: Knowledge and use of a broad range of core content and ESOL
    research-based instructional approaches, methods, strategies and techniques to
    develop students’ critical thinking skills.
       Content Knowledge
       5.1.1 CK Candidates know research- based second language approaches and
           methods that frame lesson delivery.
       5.1.2 CK Candidates know research-based instructional strategies and
           techniques based on approaches and methods for contextualizing lessons
           while situationally monitoring learning.
       5.1.3 CK Candidates understand critical thinking processes and know how to
           help learners at all levels of English proficiency develop critical thinking skills
           to promote their independent learning.
       Professional Skills
       5.1.4 PS Candidates articulate the history of approaches and methods and their
           influence on current lesson planning and implementation of lessons as
           evidenced by decisions made during lesson delivery.
       5.1.5 PS Candidates plan and implement research-based strategies and
           techniques for differentiation of instruction to successfully meet learning
           objectives. Candidates will adjust lessons as needed to ensure engagement,
           language and academic growth is occurring.
       5.1.6 PS Candidates engage learners at all levels of English proficiency in critical
           thinking processes such as questioning, generating and evaluating new ideas
           and novel approaches, seeking inventive solutions to problems and
           developing original work.

    Function 2: Reflect on instruction to determine the effective implementation of
    research-based pedagogy for the differentiation of classroom instruction in order
    to meet grade-level content and language standards.
       Content Knowledge
       5.2.1 CK Candidates know how to conduct action research and how to reflect
           critically upon the differentiation and scaffolding of instruction.
       5.2.2 CK Candidates understand the teaching methods and the diagnostic and
           prescriptive activities which are appropriate for ELs with special needs.



Kansas State Department of Education | www.ksde.gov
                                                                                             9
ENGLISH FOR SPEAKERS OF OTHER LANGUAGES (ESOL) GRADES K-6, 5-8, 6-12 AND PREK-12



         Professional Skills
         5.2.3 PS Candidates design action research and collect data for critical reflection
             and improvement of instruction.
         5.2.4 PS Candidates adapt instructional strategies and existing content materials
             and collaborate with teachers of students with exceptionalities to meet the
             needs of all ELs.

    Function 3: Candidates are familiar with technology and other instructional
    resources.
       Content Knowledge
       5.3.1 CK Candidates know how language and content development can be
           supported by technology and other instructional resources.
       5.3.2 CK Candidates know how to select and evaluate appropriate technology
           and other instructional resources for quality, accuracy and effectiveness in
           the classroom.
       5.3.3 CK Candidates know and understand how to select challenging, culturally
           appropriate and motivating technology and other instructional resources for
           active engagement in the learning process.
       Professional Skills
       5.3.4 PS Candidates design and implement lessons incorporating technology
           and other instructional resources for meeting content and language
           standards.
       5.3.5 PS Candidates design and implement lessons incorporating appropriate
           technology and other instructional resources that are accurate and effective
           for all learners.
       5.3.6 PS Candidates design and implement lessons with challenging and
           culturally appropriate technology and other instructional resources for
           maximum learner engagement including a wide range of resources.




Kansas State Department of Education | www.ksde.gov
                                                                                          10
ENGLISH FOR SPEAKERS OF OTHER LANGUAGES (ESOL) GRADES K-6, 5-8, 6-12 AND PREK-12



Standard 6: Language Proficiency and Content-Based Assessments
Candidates demonstrate understanding of language proficiency and content-based
assessments. They know and can use a variety of language proficiency instruments and
content-based assessments to evaluate language and academic growth, to guide instruction
and communicate results. Candidates demonstrate understanding of assessment issues
impacting ELs.

    Function 1: Candidates know a variety of language proficiency instruments and can
    use the results to determine the level of English language proficiency and
    determine appropriate instructional strategies.
       Content Knowledge
       6.1.1 CK Candidates know language proficiency assessments used for
           identification, placement, and reclassification of ELs.
       6.1.2 CK Candidates know how to evaluate language proficiency assessments
           and determine validity and reliability of the assessment for the population
           served.
       6.1.3 CK Candidates know how to use assessment results to determine
           appropriate instructional strategies.
       Professional Skills
       6.1.4 PS Candidates effectively administer, analyze language proficiency
           assessment results and communicate results with the appropriate audience.
       6.1.5 PS Candidates determine and communicate factors of the assessment that
           may impact student performance such as cultural and linguistic bias.
       6.1.6 PS Candidates plan appropriate instructional strategies to support
           language development and academic growth.

    Function 2: Candidates can assess learners’ content-area achievement
    independently from their language ability.
       Content Knowledge
       6.2.1 CK Candidates know that classroom assessments may give inaccurate
           content knowledge results for ELs due to cultural and linguistic factors.
       6.2.2 CK Candidates know appropriate authentic tools for the pre-instructional,
           formative and post-instructional assessment of learning.
       Professional Skills
       6.2.3 PS Candidates adapt classroom tests and tasks for each stage of ELs’
           language proficiency.
       6.2.4 PS Candidates design and implement appropriate authentic assessment
           tools to accurately assess grade-level content knowledge at each level of
           proficiency.


Kansas State Department of Education | www.ksde.gov
                                                                                       11
ENGLISH FOR SPEAKERS OF OTHER LANGUAGES (ESOL) GRADES K-6, 5-8, 6-12 AND PREK-12



    Function 3: Candidates impact the flow of events on decisions that may lead to EL
    students’ placement in special education.
       Content Knowledge
       6.3.1 CK Candidates know the current research on culture, language acquisition
           and effective practices and the process for supporting EL students struggling
           with academics and/or behavior.
       Professional Skills
       6.3.2 PS Candidates use current research on culture, language acquisition and
           effective practices to advocate for the needs of ELs.




Kansas State Department of Education | www.ksde.gov
                                                                                      12
ENGLISH FOR SPEAKERS OF OTHER LANGUAGES (ESOL) GRADES K-6, 5-8, 6-12 AND PREK-12



Standard 7: Professionalism
Candidates demonstrate knowledge of history, educational public policy and current
research in the field of ESOL. Candidates are involved in professional growth opportunities
and apply knowledge gained to inform teaching and learning.

    Function 1: Candidates are familiar with the history of ESL instruction and current
    research, approaches, methods, strategies and techniques used in the field.
       Content Knowledge
       7.1.1 CK Candidates know the impact of legal decisions (e.g. Lau v. Nichols) and
           state and/or national legislation on current educational practices.
       7.1.2 CK Candidates know the guidelines set forth by the Office for Civil Rights
           regarding the educational rights of ELs.
       7.1.3 CK Candidates know current research, approaches, methods, strategies
           and techniques used in the field.
       Professional Skills
       7.1.4 PS Candidates use the information gained from legal decisions to make
           informed recommendations for the educational needs of EL students and
           their families.
       7.1.5 PS Candidates make informed recommendations based on the guidelines
           set forth by the Office for Civil Rights.
       7.1.6 PS Candidates demonstrate appropriate planning and implementation of
           instruction based on current research, approaches, methods, strategies and
           techniques used in the field.

    Function 2: Candidates are involved in professional growth opportunities and apply
    knowledge gained to impact teaching and learning.
       Content Knowledge
       7.2.1 CK Candidates know the professional resources and opportunities
           available in the field of ESOL.
       7.2.2 CK Candidates know the process of action research to assess their own
           effectiveness as a teacher and improve student learning.
       Professional Skills
       7.2.3 PS Candidates actively participate in professional development
           opportunities, reflect and document the impact on future teaching and
           learning.
       7.2.4 PS Candidates design action research in their own classrooms and
           conduct pre- and post-assessment to collect data for critical reflection and
           improvement of instruction and assessment of ELs.



Kansas State Department of Education | www.ksde.gov
                                                                                              13
ENGLISH FOR SPEAKERS OF OTHER LANGUAGES (ESOL) GRADES K-6, 5-8, 6-12 AND PREK-12



     Function 3: Candidates advocate for ELs and their families.
        Content Knowledge
        7.3.1 CK Candidates know how to build partnerships between stakeholders (i.e.
            students’ families, schools, and communities).
        7.3.2 CK Candidates are knowledgeable about community resources available to
            EL students, families, and school personnel to enhance the well-being of the
            student and family.
        Professional Skills
        7.3.3 PS Candidates work collaboratively with stakeholders to establish mutual
            expectations and ongoing communication to support learner development
            and achievement.
        7.3.4 PS Candidates work with stakeholders to establish a network of
        community resources to enhance the well-being of the student and family.




For more information, contact:




                                                                              Kansas State Department of Education
Teacher Licensure
                                                                              900 S.W. Jackson Street, Suite 102
785-296-2288
                                                                              Topeka, Kansas 66612-1212
HEAccreditation@ksde.gov
                                                                              www.ksde.gov




The Kansas State Department of Education does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, disability
or age in its programs and activities and provides equal access to the Boy Scouts and other designated youth groups. The
following person has been designated to handle inquiries regarding the nondiscrimination policies: KSDE General Counsel, Office
of General Counsel, KSDE, Landon State Office Building, 900 S.W. Jackson, Suite 102, Topeka, KS 66612, (785) 296-3201.

Kansas State Department of Education | www.ksde.gov
                                                                                                                                    14
