Higher Education
Teacher Preparation
Standards
 Professional Education Standards




                   Kansas leads the world in the success of each student.

                                                               MONTH YEAR
PROFESSIONAL EDUCATION

The Kansas State Board of Education adopted new Professional Education preparation
program standards on January 13, 2015. They were edited to include ESOL and virtual
learning on April 29, 2016.

“Learner(s)” is defined as children including those with disabilities or exceptionalities,
who are gifted, and students who represent diversity based on ethnicity, race,
socioeconomic status, gender, language (single and/or multi), religion, and geographic
origin.

Learning environments are defined as the diverse physical locations, face-to-face and
virtual environments, contexts, and cultures in which students learn.

Standard 1: Learner Development.
The teacher understands how learners grow and develop, recognizing that patterns of
learning and development vary individually within and across the cognitive, linguistic, social,
emotional, and physical areas, and designs and implements developmentally appropriate,
relevant, and rigorous learning experiences.

    Function 1: The teacher understands how learners grow and develop.
       Content Knowledge
       1.1.1CK The teacher understands how learning occurs-- how learners construct
           knowledge, acquire skills, and develop disciplined thinking processes.
       1.1.2CK The teacher understands the role of language and culture in learning.
       Professional Skill
       1.1.3PS The teacher collaborates with families, communities, colleagues, and
           other professionals to promote learner growth and development.
       1.1.4PS The teacher identifies readiness for learning, and understands how
           development in any one area may affect performance in others.

    Function 2: The teacher recognizes that patterns of learning and development vary
    individually within and across the cognitive, linguistic, social, emotional, and physical
    areas.
       Content Knowledge
       1.2.1CK The teacher understands that each learner’s cognitive, linguistic, social,
           emotional, and physical development influences learning.
       Professional Skill
       1.2.2PS The teacher creates developmentally appropriate instruction that takes

                                                                                              2
Professional Education Standards
              into account individual learners’ strengths, interests, and needs and enables
              each learner to advance his/her learning.

    Function 3: The teacher designs and implements developmentally appropriate,
    relevant, and rigorous learning experiences.
        Content Knowledge
        1.3.1CK The teacher knows how to use instructional strategies that promote
            student learning.
        1.3.2CK The teacher knows how to make instructional decisions that build on
            learners’ strengths and needs.
        Professional Skill
        1.3.3PS The teacher regularly assesses individual and group performance in
            order to design and modify instruction to meet learners’ needs in each area
            of development (cognitive, linguistic, social, emotional, and physical) and
            scaffolds to the next level of development.
        1.3.4PS The teacher modifies instruction to make language comprehensible and
            instruction accessible, relevant, and rigorous.




                                                                                              3
Professional Education Standards
Standard 2: Learning Differences.
The teacher uses understanding of differences in individuals, languages, cultures, and
communities to ensure inclusive learning environments that enable each learner to meet
rigorous standards.

    Function 1: The teacher uses an understanding of differences in individuals,
    languages, cultures, and communities to ensure inclusive learning environments.
       Content Knowledge
       2.1.1CK The teacher understands students with exceptional needs, including
           those associated with disabilities and giftedness, and knows how to use
           strategies and resources to address these needs.
       2.1.2CK The teacher knows about second language acquisition processes and
           knows how to incorporate instructional strategies and resources to support
           language acquisition.
       2.1.3CK The teacher understands that learners bring assets for learning based
           on their individual experiences, abilities, talents, prior learning, and peer and
           social group interactions, as well as language, culture, family, and community
           values.
       Professional Skill
       2.1.4PS The teacher uses strategies and accesses resources, including
           specialized assistance and services to meet particular learning differences or
           needs.
       2.1.5PS The teacher incorporates tools of language development into planning
           and instruction, including strategies for making content accessible to English
           language learners and for evaluating and supporting their development of
           English proficiency.
       2.1.6PS The teacher brings multiple perspectives to the discussion of content,
           including attention to learner’s personal, family, and community experiences
           and cultural norms.

    Function 2: The teacher uses an understanding of differences in individuals,
    languages, cultures, and communities to enable each learner to meet rigorous
    standards.
       Content Knowledge
       2.2.1CK The teacher understands and identifies differences in appropriate
           approaches to learning and performance and knows how to design
           instruction that uses each learner’s strengths to promote growth.
       2.2.2CK The teacher knows how to access information about the values of
           diverse cultures and communities and how to incorporate each learner’s
           experiences, languages, cultures, and community into instruction.


                                                                                           4
Professional Education Standards
         Professional Skill
         2.2.3PS The teacher designs, adapts, and delivers instruction to address each
             student’s diverse learning strengths and needs and creates opportunities for
             students to demonstrate their learning in multiple ways.
         2.2.4PS The teacher makes appropriate and timely provisions (e.g., pacing for
             individual rates of growth, task demands, communication, assessment, and
             response modes) for individual students with particular learning differences
             or needs.
         2.2.5PS The teacher designs instruction to activate prior knowledge and
             experiences, allowing learners to accelerate as they demonstrate their
             understandings.




                                                                                        5
Professional Education Standards
Standard 3: Learning Environment.
The teacher works with others to create learning environments that support individual and
collaborative learning, includes teacher and student use of technology, and encourages
positive social interaction, active engagement in learning, and self-motivation.

    Function 1: The teacher works with others to create learning environments that
    support individual and collaborative learning.
       Content Knowledge
       3.1.1CK The teacher knows how to help learners work productively and
           cooperatively with each other to achieve learning goals.
       3.1.2CK The teacher knows how to collaborate with learners to establish and
           monitor elements of a safe and productive learning environment, including
           norms, expectations, routines and organizational structures.
       Professional Skill
       3.1.3PS The teacher manages the learning environment, to actively engage all
           learners appropriately by organizing, allocating, and coordinating the
           resources of time, space and learner’s attention.
       3.1.4PS The teacher uses a variety of methods to engage learners by evaluating
           the learning environment and by observing and collaborating with learners
           to make appropriate adjustments.

    Function 2: The teacher works with others to create environments that include
    teacher and student use of technology.
       Content Knowledge
       3.2.1CK The teacher understands digital citizenship, knows safe and appropriate
           technology tools for teachers and students, and their effective use in all
           learning environments.
       Professional Skill
       3.2.2PS The teacher works collaboratively with technology leaders to promote
           responsible learner use of interactive technologies to extend the possibilities
           for learning locally and globally.
       3.2.3PS The teacher intentionally builds learner capacity to collaborate through
           applying effective academic activities and discussions in virtual and
           classroom environments.

    Function 3: The teacher works with others to encourage positive social interaction,
    active engagement in learning, and self-motivation.
        Content Knowledge
        3.3.1CK The teacher understands the relationship between motivation and
            engagement and knows how to design learning experiences using strategies
            that build learner self-governance, self-direction, and ownership of learning.
                                                                                             6
Professional Education Standards
         Professional Skill
         3.3.2PS The teacher collaborates with learners, families and colleagues to build
             a safe, positive learning climate of openness, mutual respect, support and
             inquiry.
         3.3.3PS The teacher develops learning
             experiences that engage learners in collaboration, self-governance, self-
             directed learning and that extend learner interaction with ideas and people
             locally and globally.
         3.3.4PS The teacher collaborates with learners and
             colleagues to develop shared values and expectations for respectful
             interactions, rigorous academic discussions, and individual and group
             responsibility for quality work.
         3.3.5PS The teacher communicates verbally and nonverbally in ways that
             demonstrate respect for and responsiveness to the diverse backgrounds
             and differing perspectives learners bring to the learning environment.




                                                                                            7
Professional Education Standards
Standard 4: Content Knowledge.
The teacher understands the central concepts, tools of inquiry, and structures of the
discipline(s) he or she teaches and creates content-specific learning and literacy experiences
that make the discipline accessible and relevant to assure mastery of the content.

    Function 1: The teacher understands the central concepts, tools of inquiry, and
    structures of the discipline(s) he or she teaches.
        Content Knowledge
        4.1.1CK The teacher understands major concepts, assumptions, debates, the
            process of inquiry, and ways of knowing that are central to the discipline(s)
            s/he teaches.
        4.1.2CK The teacher understands common misconceptions that occur in
            learning the discipline and how to guide learners to accurate conceptual
            understanding.
        4.1.3CK The teacher has a deep knowledge of
        Kansas College and Career Ready Standards and their learning progressions for
            the discipline(s) s/he teaches.
        Professional Skill
        4.1.4PS The teacher effectively uses multiple representations and explanations
            that capture key ideas in the discipline, guide learners through learning
            progressions, and promote each learner’s achievement of content
            standards.
        4.1.5PS The teacher evaluates and modifies instructional resources and
            curriculum materials for their comprehensiveness, accuracy for representing
            particular concepts in the discipline and appropriateness for his/her
            learners.
        4.1.6PS The teacher uses supplementary resources and technologies effectively
            to ensure accessibility, rigor, and relevance for all learners.

    Function 2: The teacher creates learning experiences that make the discipline
    accessible and relevant for learners to assure mastery of the content and provides
    opportunities for literacy experiences across content areas.
       Content Knowledge
       4.2.1CK The teacher knows and uses the academic language of the discipline
           and knows how to make it accessible, relevant, and rigorous.
       4.2.2CK The teacher knows how to integrate culturally relevant content to build
           on learners’ background knowledge.
       Professional Skill
       4.2.3PS The teacher engages students in learning experiences in the discipline(s)
           that encourage learners to understand, question, and analyze ideas from
           diverse perspectives so that they master the content.
                                                                                                 8
Professional Education Standards
         4.2.4PS The teacher engages learners in applying methods of inquiry and
             standards of evidence used in the discipline.
         4.2.5PS The teacher stimulates learner reflection on prior content knowledge,
             links new concepts to familiar concepts, and makes connections to learners’
             experiences.
         4.2.6PS The teacher recognizes learner misconceptions in a discipline that
             interfere with learning and creates experiences to build accurate conceptual
             understanding.
         4.2.7PS The teacher creates opportunities for students to learn, practice, and
             master academic language in their content.
         4.2.8PS The teacher accesses school and/or district based resources to evaluate
             the learner’s content knowledge in their primary language.




                                                                                        9
Professional Education Standards
Standard 5: Application of Content.
The teacher understands how to engage learners through interdisciplinary lessons that
utilize concept based teaching and authentic learning experiences to engage students in
effective communication and collaboration, and in critical and creative thinking.

    Function 1: The teacher engages learners through the creation of interdisciplinary
    lessons and facilitates the examination of issues from multiple perspectives
    through varied communication modes.
        Content Knowledge
        5.1.1CK The teacher understands how cross-curricular themes interlace and
            provide an in depth learning experience.
        5.1.2CK The teacher understands varied communication methods are used as
            vehicles for gaining and expressing learning, and for gaining an
            understanding of and expressing multiple perspectives.
        Professional Skill
        5.1.3PS Using content specific pedagogy, the teacher creates interdisciplinary
            lessons connecting content themes and literacy.
        5.1.4PS The teacher develops learners’ communication skills by creating
            interdisciplinary learning opportunities requiring the employment of varied
            forms of communication tailored to given audiences and purposes.
        5.1.5PS The teacher facilitates learning opportunities that require examination
            of issues from multiple perspectives, expanding understanding of local and
            global issues.

    Function 2: The teacher facilitates learning opportunities involving critical and
    creative thinking.
       Content Knowledge
       5.2.1CK The teacher understands thinking processes which lead to creative and
           critical analysis.
       5.2.2CK The teacher understands the role of high level questioning to promote
           independent thinking.
       Professional Skill
       5.2.3PS The teacher facilitates innovative learning experiences that require
           creative and critical analysis.
       5.2.4PS The teacher engages learners through experiences requiring analysis of
           complex issues resulting in inventive solutions through original thinking.
       5.2.5PS The teacher engages learners in questioning and challenging
           assumptions and processes to foster innovative thinking and problem
           solving.



                                                                                          10
Professional Education Standards
    Function 3: Through concept-based teaching, the teacher incorporates learning
    opportunities that involve solving authentic, real world problems independently and
    collaboratively.
        Content Knowledge
        5.3.1CK The teacher understands the concepts that govern his/her content
            area.
        5.3.2CK The teacher understands how concept based teaching leads to
            conceptual and philosophical understandings.
        5.3.3CK The teacher understands the role information literacy skills play in
            understanding issues and solving problems independently and
            collaboratively.
        Professional Skill
        5.3.4PS The teacher creates concept-based lessons, which facilitate conceptual
            and philosophical understandings.
        5.3.5PS The teacher facilitates the application of conceptual and philosophical
            understandings to the resolution of local and global issues.
        5.3.6PS Through the use of varied technologies and resources, the teacher
            facilitates the acquisition and application of that knowledge to solve real
            world problems.




                                                                                     11
Professional Education Standards
Standard 6: Assessment.
The teacher understands how to use multiple measures to monitor and assess individual
student learning, engage learners in self-assessment, and use data to make decisions.

    Function 1: The teacher understands how to use multiple measures to monitor and
    assess individual student learning.
       Content Knowledge
       6.1.1CK The teacher understands the difference between formative and
           summative assessment.
       6.1.2CK The teacher understands the multiple methods of assessment and how
           to select assessments based that are both reliable and valid based on the
           specific learning goals and learner needs.
       6.1.3CK The teacher understands the role of feedback in learner achievement
           and can supply feedback in a variety of communication modes.
       Professional Skill
       6.1.4PS The teacher designs assessment plans with a balance between
           formative and summative assessments.
       6.1.5PS The teacher designs assessments aligned with the learning goals,
           utilizing multiple measures that maintain validity and reliability.
       6.1.6PS The teacher differentiates assessments and assessment environments
           based on learner needs.
       6.1.7PS The teacher provides effective feedback and shares this with learners in
           a variety of communication modes.

    Function 2: The teacher understands how to engage learners in self-assessment.
       Content Knowledge
       6.2.1CK The teacher knows when to engage learners in analyzing their own
           assessment results.
       6.2.2CK The teacher knows how and when to engage learners in setting goals
           for future achievement.
       6.2.3CK The teacher knows how to prepare learners for assessments.
       Professional Skill
       6.2.4PS The teacher engages learners in analyzing their own assessment data.
       6.2.5PS The teacher guides learners through a process of analyzing their own
           thinking and learning, resulting in goal setting using data.
       6.2.6PS The teacher engages learners in the assessment process through
           appropriate feedback utilizing technology and other communication modes.

    Function 3: The teacher understands how to make informed decisions.
       Content Knowledge
       6.3.1CK The teacher knows how to analyze and report assessment data to
                                                                                        12
Professional Education Standards
             understand patterns and gaps in learning based on given learning goals.
         6.3.2CK The teacher knows how to use data to guide planning and instruction.
         6.3.3CK The teacher knows how to provide relevant feedback to all learners.
         Professional Skill
         6.3.4PS The teacher works independently and collaboratively to examine test
             and other performance data to understand patterns and gaps in learning
             based on given learning goals.
         6.3.5PS The teacher works independently and collaboratively to examine test
             and other performance data to understand each learner’s differentiated
             needs and to guide planning and instruction accordingly.
         6.3.6PS The teacher communicates feedback from assessments to assist
             students in making relevant decision.




                                                                                        13
Professional Education Standards
Standard 7: Planning for Instruction.
The teacher plans instruction that supports every student in meeting rigorous learning goals
by drawing upon knowledge of content areas, technology, curriculum, cross-disciplinary
skills, and pedagogy, as well as knowledge of learners and the community context.

    Function 1: The teacher plans instruction that supports every student in meeting
    rigorous learning goals.
        Content Knowledge
        7.1.1CK The teacher knows a range of evidence-based instructional strategies,
            resources, and technological tools and how to use them effectively to plan
            instruction that meets diverse learning needs.
        7.1.2CK The teacher knows when and how to adjust plans based on assessment
            information and learner responses.
        Professional Skill
        7.1.3PS The teacher develops and evaluates plans in relation to short- and long-
            range goals.
        7.1.4PS The teacher systematically adjusts plans to enhance each student’s
            learning.

    Function 2: The teacher plans instruction by drawing upon knowledge of content
    areas, technology, curriculum, cross-disciplinary skills, and pedagogy.
       Content Knowledge
       7.2.1CK The teacher understands content and content standards and how these
           are organized in the curriculum.
       7.2.2CK The teacher understands how integrating cross- disciplinary skills in
           instruction engages learners in applying content knowledge in relevant ways.
       7.2.3CK The teacher knows when and how to access multiple types of resources
           and collaborate with others to support student learning (e.g., special
           educators, related service providers, language learner specialists,
           instructional technology coordinators, librarians, media specialists,
           community organizations).
       Professional Skill
       7.2.4PS The teacher individually and collaboratively selects and creates learning
           experiences that are appropriate for curriculum goals and content
           standards, and are relevant to learners.
       7.2.5PS The teacher plans collaboratively with professionals who have
           specialized expertise (e.g., special educators, related service providers,
           language learning specialists, instructional technology coordinators,
           librarians, media specialists) to design and jointly deliver, as appropriate,
           learning experiences to meet unique learning needs.


                                                                                           14
Professional Education Standards
    Function 3: The teacher plans instruction based on knowledge of learners and the
    community context.
       Content Knowledge
       7.3.1CK The teacher understands learning theory, human development, cultural
           diversity, linguistic diversity, community context, and individual differences
           and how these impact ongoing planning.
       7.3.2CK The teacher understands the strengths and needs of individual learners
           and how to plan instruction that is responsive to these strengths and needs.
       Professional Skill
       7.3.3PS The teacher plans how to achieve each student’s learning goals,
           choosing appropriate strategies and accommodations, resources,
           instructional and assistive technologies, and materials to differentiate
           instruction for individuals and groups of learners.
       7.3.4PS The teacher develops appropriate sequencing of learning experiences
           and provides multiple ways to demonstrate knowledge and skill.
       7.3.5PS The teacher plans for instruction based on formative, informative, and
           summative assessment data, prior learner knowledge, and learner interest.




                                                                                       15
Professional Education Standards
Standard 8: Instructional Strategies.
The teacher understands and uses a variety of appropriate instructional strategies and
resources to encourage learners to develop deep understanding of content areas and their
connections, and to build skills to apply knowledge in relevant ways.

    Function 1: The teacher understands and uses a variety of instructional strategies
    and resources to encourage learners to develop deep understanding of content
    areas and their connections.
       Content Knowledge
       8.1.1CK The teacher understands the cognitive processes associated with
           various kinds of learning (e.g., critical and creative thinking, problem framing
           and problem solving, invention, memorization and recall) and how these
           processes can be stimulated.
       8.1.2CK The teacher knows how to apply a range of developmentally, culturally,
           and linguistically appropriate instructional strategies to achieve learning
           goals.
       8.1.3CK The teacher knows when and how to use appropriate strategies to
           differentiate instruction and engage all learners in complex thinking and
           meaningful tasks.
       8.1.4CK The teacher understands how content and skill development can be
           supported by media and technology and knows how to evaluate these
           resources for rigor, quality, accuracy, and effectiveness.
       Professional Skill
       8.1.5PS The teacher uses appropriate strategies and resources to differentiate
           instruction to meet the needs of individuals and groups of learners.
       8.1.6PS The teacher continuously monitors student learning, engages learners
           in assessing their progress and setting goals, and adjusts instruction in
           response to student learning needs.
       8.1.7PS The teacher collaborates with learners to design and implement
           relevant and rigorous learning experiences, identify their strengths, and
           access family and community resources to develop their areas of interest.
       8.1.8PS The teacher varies his/her role in the instructional process (e.g.,
           instructor, facilitator, coach, co-teacher, audience) in relation to the content
           and purposes of instruction and the needs of learners.
       8.1.9PS The teacher engages all learners in developing higher order questioning
           skills and the metacognitive processes.
       8.1.10PS The teacher asks questions to stimulate discussion that serves
           different purposes (e.g., probing for learner understanding, helping learners
           articulate their ideas and thinking processes, stimulating curiosity, and
           helping learners to question).


                                                                                           16
Professional Education Standards
    Function 2: The teacher understands and uses a variety of instructional strategies
    and resources to encourage learners to build skills to apply knowledge in relevant
    ways.
       Content Knowledge
       8.2.1CK The teacher understands how multiple forms of communication (oral,
           written, nonverbal, digital, visual) convey ideas, foster self -expression, and
           build relationships.
       8.2.2CK The teacher knows how to use a wide variety of appropriate resources,
           including human resources, print and visual materials, and technology, to
           engage students in skill building and learning.
       Professional Skill
       8.2.3PS The teacher provides multiple models and representations of concepts
           and skills with opportunities for learners to demonstrate their knowledge
           through a variety of products and performances.
       8.2.4PS The teacher engages learners in using a range of learning skills and
           technology tools to access, interpret, evaluate, and apply information.
       8.2.5PS The teacher uses a variety of instructional strategies to support and
           expand learners’ communication through speaking, listening, reading,
           writing, visual representation, and viewing.
       8.2.6PS The teacher uses a variety of resources, including human resources,
           print and visual materials, and technology to engage students in learning.




                                                                                         17
Professional Education Standards
Standard 9: Professional Learning and Ethical Practice.
The teacher engages in ongoing professional learning and uses evidence to continually
evaluate his/her practice, particularly the effects of his/her choices and actions on others
(learners, families, other professionals, and the community), and adapts practice to meet the
needs of each learner.

    Function 1: The teacher engages in ongoing professional learning.
       Content Knowledge
       9.1.1CK The teacher understands the laws related to learner rights and teacher
           responsibilities (educational equity, appropriate education for learners with
           disabilities, confidentiality, privacy, appropriate treatment of learners, and
           reporting situations related to possible child abuse).
       9.1.2CK The teacher understands ethical practice, and upholds the Kansas
           Educator Code of Conduct focused on the best interests of their students,
           and responsibilities to the student(s) and families, the district, and the
           profession.
       9.1.3CK The teacher understands a professional educator is a lifelong learner,
           staying apprised of current trends and research in the field.
       Professional Skill
       9.1.4PS The teacher advocates, models, and teaches safe, legal, and ethical use
           of information and technology including appropriate documentation of
           sources and respect for others in using social media.
       9.1.5PS The teacher takes responsibility for implementing new knowledge, ideas,
           and strategies.

    Function 2: The teacher uses evidence to continually evaluate his/her practice,
    particularly the effects of his/her choices and actions on others (learners, families,
    other professionals, and the community), and adapts practice to meet the needs of
    each learner.
       Content Knowledge
       9.2.1CK The teacher understands the role and goals of reflection in professional
           growth.
       9.2.2CK The teacher understands how the elements of the evaluation protocol
           corresponds with professional learning experiences or opportunities.
       Professional Skill
       9.2.3PS The teacher effectively uses student data, self-assessment, teaching
           evaluations / observations, educator colleagues, school and district goals,
           and problem solving strategies to analyze and reflect on his/her practice
           related to all stakeholders, and to plan for professional growth.



                                                                                           18
Professional Education Standards
Standard 10: Leadership and Collaboration.
The teacher seeks appropriate leadership roles and opportunities to take responsibility for
student learning, to collaborate with learners, families, colleagues, other school
professionals, support staff, and community members to ensure learner growth, and to
advance the profession.

    Function 1: The teacher seeks appropriate leadership roles and opportunities to
    take responsibility for student learning.
       Content Knowledge
       10.1.1CK The teacher understands schools as organizations within a historical,
           cultural, political, and social context and knows how to work with others
           across the system to support learners.
       Professional Skill
       10.1.2PS The teacher is able to incorporate multiple measures of student
           learning with a clear focus on improving teacher practice.
       10.2.3PS The teacher is an active participant in professional learning
           communities, recognizing that all teachers share responsibility for student
           success.

    Function 2: The teacher seeks appropriate leadership roles and opportunities to
    collaborate with learners, families, colleagues, other school professionals, and
    community members to ensure learner growth.
        Content Knowledge
        10.2.1CK The teacher understands the importance of the multiple roles of
           teachers with regards to the diversity of learners, families, colleagues, other
           school professionals, and community members and interacts with each
           appropriately in planning, instructing, collaborating, mentoring, learning,
           leading, etc.
        10.2.2CK The teacher knows how to collaborate with families, colleagues, other
           school professionals, and community members to contribute to a common
           culture that supports high expectations for student learning.
        Professional Skill
        10.2.3PS The teacher welcomes families; participates in regular two-way,
           meaningful communication; supports student successes; advocates for every
           child; shares power with the families and professionals involved with each
           individual student; and collaborates with appropriate school and community
           resources (PTA.org, n. d.).
        10.2.4PS The teacher provides information to families about the instructional
           programs, each individual student’s progress, and ways that they can be
           engaged in learning activities (Danielson, 2013).
        10.2.5PS The teacher works with colleagues in a leadership role to examine
                                                                                              19
Professional Education Standards
             teacher practice and student data to plan and jointly meet the needs of
             learners.
          10.2.6PS The teacher engages collaboratively in the school-wide effort to build a
             shared vision and supportive culture, to identify common goals, and monitor
             and evaluate progress toward those goals.




For more information, contact:




                                                                              Kansas State Department of Education
Teacher Licensure
                                                                              900 S.W. Jackson Street, Suite 102
785-296-2288
                                                                              Topeka, Kansas 66612-1212
HEAccreditation@ksde.gov
                                                                              www.ksde.gov




The Kansas State Department of Education does not discriminate on the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, sex, disability
or age in its programs and activities and provides equal access to the Boy Scouts and other designated youth groups. The
following person has been designated to handle inquiries regarding the nondiscrimination policies: KSDE General Counsel, Office
of General Counsel, KSDE, Landon State Office Building, 900 S.W. Jackson, Suite 102, Topeka, KS 66612, (785) 296-3201.


                                                                                                                                    20
Professional Education Standards
