                      TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
     LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                            5.505
     PREPARATION


Policy Sections:

I.       Literacy Standards
II.      Specialty Area Program Standards


Educator Preparation Providers (EPPs) shall ensure that all programs that lead to licensure are aligned to
all applicable literacy standards and all applicable specialty area standards. These standards shall apply to
all new and currently approved Specialty Area Programs (SAPs).

In accordance with the Tennessee Literacy Success Act of 2021 (“the Act”), beginning on August 1, 2022,
EPPs must provide training on reading instruction focused primarily on foundational literacy skills
standards to applicable candidates seeking licensure to teach grades K-3 as well as candidates seeking
instructional leader licenses. In alignment with the Act, these foundational literacy skills standards
include:

(1)      How to effectively teach the foundational literacy skills of phonemic awareness, phonics, fluency,
         vocabulary, and comprehension;

(2)      How to identify access points and scaffolds needed for teaching students with advanced reading
         skills and students with significant reading deficiencies;

(3)      How to identify the characteristics of dyslexia through a universal screening process and provide
         effective instruction for teaching students with these characteristics using evidence-based,
         multisensory interventions;

(4)      How to implement reading instruction using high-quality instructional materials (HQIM);

(5)      Behavior management through trauma-informed principles for the classroom and other
         developmentally appropriate supports to ensure that students can effectively access reading
         instruction; and

(6)      How to administer a universal reading screener to students and use the resulting data to improve
         reading instruction and appropriate interventions for students.


I.       Literacy Standards

         Educator candidates shall understand and implement standards- and research-based knowledge
         and practices that enable all students to become proficient, motivated and independent readers
         and writers, and learners as they build and share knowledge through their reading and writing.




Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                            Page 1 of 64
                    TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                            5.505
 PREPARATION


      (1)    Early Education Foundational Literacy Skills Standards. The following early education
             foundational literacy skills standards shall be implemented in all programs that lead to
             endorsement in:

             Early Development and Learning pre-K–K;

             Early Childhood Education pre-K–3;

             Integrated Early Childhood Education Birth-Kindergarten;

             Integrated Early Childhood Education pre-K-3;

             Elementary Education K–5;

             Special Education Early Childhood pre-K–3;

             Special Education Comprehensive K–12;

             Special Education Interventionist K–8; or

             Special Education Interventionist 6–12.

             Standard 1: Content Knowledge

             1.1.     Content Knowledge. Educator candidates must demonstrate knowledge of
                      theoretical and research-based instructional practices related to students’
                      literacy development, language acquisition, reading, writing, and
                      communication, including knowledge of:

                      (a)    Cognitive, linguistic, motivational, and sociocultural foundations of
                             reading, writing, speaking, and listening development;

                      (b)    Students’ literacy development from birth through high school;

                      (c)    Students’ cultural and linguistic (e.g., different dialects, languages other
                             than English) histories as a resource for literacy development and
                             instruction;

                      (d)    Developmentally appropriate and diverse instructional practices that
                             support equitable learning opportunities and the success of all students,
                             which may include:




Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                        Page 2 of 64
                  TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                           5.505
 PREPARATION


                             1.      Access points and scaffolds embedded in instructional materials
                                     or developed by educators for teaching students with advanced
                                     reading skills, students with significant reading deficiencies; and

                             2.      Providing evidence-based, multi-sensory/multi-modal inter-
                                     ventions for students with characteristics of dyslexia;

                      (e)    Oral language as a basis for reading development, including knowledge
                             of students’ dialect or different language characteristics (including
                             students who are unable to use and/or access spoken language), and
                             semantics, and discourse level skills);

                      (f)    Foundational skills (including phonological awareness, phonemic
                             awareness, fluency, phonics, and vocabulary development), word level
                             skills, vocabulary knowledge and acquisition, and knowledge of text craft
                             and structure (including literary, persuasive, and informational);

                      (g)    Specific Learning Disability (SLD), as defined in State Board of Education
                             Rule 0520-01-09-.03, eligibility in the areas of basic reading, reading
                             fluency, or reading comprehension in compliance with the Individuals
                             with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) and Chapter 0520-01-09 of the
                             State Board of Education Rules;

                      (h)    Speech or Language Impairment (SLI), as defined in State Board of
                             Education Rule 0520-01-09-.03, eligibility in the areas of language and
                             speech (i.e., articulation, voice, or fluency) in compliance with the
                             Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) and Chapter 0520-01-09
                             of the State Board of Education Rules;

                       (i)   The requirements for screening for characteristics of dyslexia under
                             T.C.A. § 49-1-229 and how to assess, analyze, and interpret data to
                             appropriately identify students with characteristics of dyslexia who
                             require dyslexia-specific interventions based on the areas commonly
                             associated with dyslexia (phonological awareness, phonemic awareness,
                             alphabet knowledge, sound symbol recognition, decoding skills, encoding
                             skills), rapid naming, and reading fluency);

                      (j)    Data-based decision making and student intervention plans, including
                             Individualized Learning Plan for Characteristics of Dyslexia (ILP-D)
                             pursuant to State Board Rule 0520-01-22. This includes the two step
                             criteria for ILP-D eligibility, how to develop an ILP-D, and the
                             circumstances under which a student is not eligible for an ILP-D;


Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                       Page 3 of 64
                    TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                             5.505
 PREPARATION


                      (k)     Ways to traverse diverse and complex texts, including traditional print
                              texts and digital texts, selecting texts that are representative of diverse
                              cultural and linguistic experiences of students; and

                      (l)     How to integrate knowledge and ideas across texts, through reading
                              comprehension of texts, when composing texts, and when
                              demonstrating understanding through speaking and writing.

             1.2.     Foundational Literacy Skills. Educator candidates must demonstrate mastery of
                      the skills students need to be taught (e.g., spoken words, sounds, and syllables)
                      and are able to teach students how to employ the many components of
                      foundational literacy skills, including:

                      (a)     Oral English language – spoken language, including the development of
                              spoken words and articulated sounds, consisting of theories of speech
                              and language development that cover syntax, morphology, semantics,
                              phonology, pragmatics, and articulation skills;

                      (b)     The organization and basic features of print - including orthography,
                              syntax, and discourse structure;

                      (c)     Phonological awareness – the ability to identify and manipulate oral
                              language, including words, syllables, onsets, and rimes and is inclusive of
                              the advanced skills within phonemic awareness;

                      (d)     Phonemic awareness – the specific ability to focus on and manipulate
                              individual sounds (phonemes) in spoken words;

                      (e)     Phonics and word recognition (also known as sound/symbol recognition)
                              - understanding of letter-sound knowledge and alphabetic under-
                              standing, phonic/structural analysis elements along a continuum for
                              decoding when reading grade-level texts; word analysis skills when
                              decoding isolated words and in connected text, regular word reading,
                              irregular word reading, and reading in decodable text;

                      (f)     Decoding – the ability to apply knowledge of letter-sound relationships
                              as well as letter patterns to correctly pronounce written words;

                      (g)     Letter knowledge (also known as alphabet knowledge) – the ability to
                              identify the letters of the alphabet with speed and automaticity and
                              understanding of the alphabetic and print concepts, as well as the ability
                              to identify and discriminate between letters (visual discrimination);


Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                        Page 4 of 64
                    TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                           5.505
 PREPARATION


                      (h)    Word composition - encoding when writing: grade-level phonics and
                             word analysis skills when encoding words, writing legibly;

                      (i)    Advanced word study - understanding morphology, syllabication, the
                             study of word parts, regular word reading, irregular word reading,
                             etymology, Greek and Latin roots, and inflectional endings;

                      (j)    Fluency - reading with sufficient automaticity, pacing, prosody (e.g.,
                             intonation, tone, stress, rhythm), and accuracy to support
                             comprehension across the disciplines; and

                      (k)    Encoding skills – the translation of a spoken word or sound into a written
                             symbol;

                      (l)    Rapid naming – ability to connect visual and verbal information by giving
                             the appropriate names to common objects, colors, letters, and digits;
                             information is quickly named/retrieved. Rapid naming requires the
                             retrieval of phonological information related to phonemes (i.e.,
                             letter/letter combination sounds), segments of words, and words from
                             long-term memory in an efficient manner.

             1.3.     Vocabulary Knowledge and Acquisition. Educator candidates must demonstrate
                      their knowledge and mastery of the skills to prepare students to:

                      (a)    Determine or clarify the meaning of unknown and multiple-meaning
                             words and phrases by using context clues, analyzing meaningful word
                             parts, and consulting general and specialized reference materials, as
                             appropriate, to support comprehension of connected text;

                      (b)    Comprehend figurative language, word relationships, and nuances in
                             word meanings and employ them in writing;

                      (c)    Acquire and accurately use general academic and domain-specific words
                             and phrases necessary for comprehension, discussion, and writing about
                             complex texts, and that meet the demands for reading, writing, speaking,
                             and listening in post-secondary and the workforce;

                      (d)    Develop independence in acquiring vocabulary knowledge when
                             considering a word or phrase important to comprehension or expression;

                      (e)    Interpret words and phrases as they are used in a text, including
                             technical, connotative, and figurative meanings and analyze how specific
                             word choices shape meaning or tone; and


Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                      Page 5 of 64
                    TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                               5.505
 PREPARATION


                      (f)     Develop a broad, expressive vocabulary and apply vocabulary words with
                              precision in both oral and written settings to more accurately convey
                              meaning and interest.

             1.4.     Craft and Structure of the Language of Texts (including print, visual, multimodal,
                      and digital texts). Educator candidates must demonstrate their knowledge and
                      mastery of the skills to prepare students to:

                      (a)     Apply knowledge of language to understand how language functions in
                              different contexts, to make effective choices for meaning or style, and to
                              comprehend more fully when reading or listening;

                      (b)     Recognize various text structures and employ specific comprehension
                              strategies based on the unique demands of the text structure and
                              organization;

                      (c)     Read closely and answer text dependent questions to determine what a
                              text says explicitly and to generate logical inferences; cite specific textual
                              evidence when writing or speaking to support conclusions drawn from a
                              text;

                      (d)     Determine central ideas or themes of a text and analyze their
                              development; summarize the key supporting details and ideas;

                      (e)     Analyze how and why individuals, events, and ideas develop and interact
                              over the course of a text;

                      (f)     Analyze the structure of texts and how specific sentences, paragraphs,
                              and larger portions of a text (e.g., a section, chapter, scene, or stanza)
                              relate to each other and the whole;

                      (g)     Assess how point of view and purpose shape the content and style of a
                              text; and

                      (h)     Use understandings of the craft and structure of texts to convey ideas in
                              writing for different purposes and audiences.

             1.5.     Range of Texts and Text Complexity. Educator candidates must demonstrate their
                      knowledge and mastery of the skills to prepare students to:

                      (a)     Read and comprehend complex literary and informational texts
                              independently and proficiently; recognize various text structures and
                              employ specific comprehension strategies based on the unique demands
                              of the text structure and organization; and

Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                          Page 6 of 64
                    TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                            5.505
 PREPARATION


                      (b)    Produce texts representing a range of text types (genre) and complexity
                             for different purposes and audiences.

             1.6.     Integration of Knowledge and Ideas. Educator candidates must demonstrate their
                      knowledge and mastery of the skills to prepare students to:

                      (a)    Integrate and evaluate content presented in diverse formats and media,
                             including content presented visually and quantitatively, as well as in word
                             form;

                      (b)    Delineate and evaluate the argument and specific claims in a text,
                             including the validity of the reasoning as well as the relevance and
                             sufficiency of the evidence;

                      (c)    Analyze how two or more texts address similar themes or topics in order
                             to build knowledge or to compare the approaches an author takes;

                      (d)    Integrate foundational skills and strategies within authentic reading and
                             writing contexts; and

                      (e)    Make connections to reading and writing across the disciplines.

             1.7.     Comprehension and Collaboration. Educator candidates must demonstrate their
                      knowledge and mastery of the skills to prepare students to:

                      (a)    Develop a deep understanding of language comprehension, including
                             background knowledge, vocabulary, receptive language development,
                             language structures, verbal reasoning, and literacy knowledge, and its
                             impact on skilled reading in conjunction with foundational literacy skills;

                      (b)    Participate effectively in a range of conversations and collaborations with
                             varied partners, building on others’ ideas and expressing their own ideas
                             clearly and persuasively;

                      (c)    Evaluate a speaker’s point of view, reasoning, use of evidence, and
                             rhetoric;

                      (d)    Ask and answer questions to demonstrate comprehension when
                             information is presented orally in a range of settings and from diverse
                             speakers (e.g., directions, texts, presentations, and videos);

                      (e)    Present information, findings, and supporting evidence such that
                             listeners can follow the line of reasoning;


Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                       Page 7 of 64
                    TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                           5.505
 PREPARATION


                      (f)    Ensure that the organization, development, and style of communication
                             are appropriate to the task, purpose, and audience;

                      (g)    Make strategic use of texts, digital media, and visual displays of data to
                             express information and enhance understanding of presentations; and

                      (h)    Adapt speech to a variety of contexts and communicative tasks,
                             demonstrating command of formal English when indicated or
                             appropriate.

             1.8.     Writing. Educator candidates must demonstrate their knowledge and mastery of
                      the skills to prepare students to:

                      (a)    Use conventions of standard English grammar and usage when speaking
                             and conventions of standard English grammar and usage, including
                             capitalization and punctuation, when writing;

                      (b)    Recognize the purpose (i.e., to communicate ideas to be understood by
                             others) and subsequent formatting (e.g., formal, informal, creative,
                             expository, etc.) for writing;

                      (c)    Engage in writing as a process involving actions such as brainstorming,
                             revising, editing, and publishing, and not just a product;

                      (d)    Write arguments to support claims in an analysis of substantive topics or
                             texts, using valid reasoning and relevant and sufficient evidence;

                      (e)    Write informative/explanatory texts to examine and convey complex
                             ideas and information clearly and accurately through the effective
                             selection, organization, and analysis of content;

                      (f)    Write narratives to develop real or imagined experiences or events using
                             effective techniques, well-chosen details, and well-structured event
                             sequences;

                      (g)    Produce clear and coherent writing in which the development and
                             organization are appropriate to the task, purpose, and audience;

                      (h)    Develop and strengthen writing as needed by planning, revising, editing,
                             rewriting, or trying a new approach;

                      (i)    Use technology, including the internet, to produce and publish writing
                             and to interact and collaborate with others;


Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                      Page 8 of 64
                    TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                               5.505
 PREPARATION


                      (j)     Integrate relevant and credible information from multiple print and
                              digital sources while avoiding plagiarism;

                      (k)     Draw evidence from literary or informational texts to support analysis,
                              reflection, and research;

                      (l)     Write routinely over extended time frames (time for research, reflection,
                              and revision) and shorter time frames (a single sitting or a day or two) for
                              a range of tasks, purposes, and audiences; and

                      (m)     Conduct short as well as more sustained research projects based on focus
                              questions, demonstrating a new understanding of the subject under
                              investigation.

             Standard 2: Language and Literacy Rich Environment

             Educator candidates shall:

             2.1.     Demonstrate and apply knowledge about individual development in language
                      and literacy, including identifying and responding to the uniqueness of each
                      student.

             2.2.     Demonstrate and apply knowledge of language diversity as a source of strength
                      in society to be encouraged and not discouraged.

             2.3.     Identify differences between students progressing successfully toward literacy
                      and those who are not progressing, including their personal experiences and
                      dispositions (e.g., poverty, poor or unsuccessful experiences with reading,
                      advanced reading skills, significant reading deficiency, characteristics of dyslexia),
                      and their access to books and exposure to high-quality instruction, and
                      implement instruction responsive to these differences.

             2.4      Ensure that all students have access and exposure to complex, grade-appropriate
                      text and avoid “leveling” (the practice of matching students to texts based on
                      their measured reading proficiency level) because it can slow the learning of
                      struggling readers by confining them to overly simple, below-grade-level texts.

             2.5      Use a range of texts, including print and digital, to provide a wide range of reading
                      choices for students, and incorporate texts that represent students’ existing
                      knowledge, interests, and cultural diversity.

             2.6.     Incorporate disciplinary and instructional texts representing diverse students,
                      multiple genres, perspectives, and media necessary to prepare all students for
                      literacy tasks for the 21st century.

Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                          Page 9 of 64
                     TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                            5.505
 PREPARATION


             2.7.     Establish literacy learning classroom environments that enable multiple
                      classroom organizations, including those that support individual and
                      collaborative learning, and promote peer-to-peer interaction.

             2.8.     Demonstrate the ability to help students participate as knowledgeable, reflective,
                      creative, caring, respectful, and critical members of a variety of literacy
                      communities (e.g., home, classroom, school, workplace, and community), and
                      within globally and digitally connected communities.

             2.9.     Position students as knowledgeable and valuable contributors of information
                      (e.g., cooperative speaking opportunities, brainstorming discussions), which
                      allows all students to participate, regardless of their speaking or writing
                      proficiency.

             2.10.    Utilize routines and structures that prompt frequent language interactions (e.g.,
                      turn and talks, quick writes).

             2.11     Utilize routines and structures that encourage students to decode text
                      systematically rather than to guess at its meaning using “cueing” methods such
                      as “MSV” (meaning, syntax, visual) that divert attention from the words
                      themselves.

             2.12.    Create a physical environment that presents varied language representations
                      (e.g., images, charts, lists, poems) and that provides resources that support
                      students’ language and literacy development (e.g., anchor posters, word walls,
                      picture or print dictionaries).

             Standard 3: High-Quality Instructional Materials (HQIM) and Lesson Preparation

             Educator candidates shall:

             3.1.     Describe design principles of high-quality instructional materials in English
                      language arts and literacy, including use of evidence-based practices; alignment
                      to grade-level standards; coherent progressions of content and tasks; and access
                      points supporting all students, including those with advanced reading skills,
                      significant reading deficiency, and characteristics of dyslexia, to engage
                      meaningfully in grade-appropriate learning centered on complex texts.

             3.2.     Implement high-quality instructional materials with integrity to their design
                      principles, choosing scaffolds and supports matched to individual students’
                      strengths and needs, while maintaining grade-appropriate rigor and alignment to
                      Tennessee Academic Standards in all literacy instruction.



Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                      Page 10 of 64
                    TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                             5.505
 PREPARATION


             3.3.     Use unit preparation, lesson preparation, and student work analysis protocols
                      focused on a cycle of intellectual preparation (i.e., a focused form of lesson
                      preparation that helps a teacher prepare to teach using existing lesson plans
                      within high-quality instructional materials in lieu of creating their own lesson
                      plans outside of the adopted high-quality instructional materials) and
                      internalization of high-quality instructional materials (i.e., the act of teacher
                      practicing the lessons with HQIM to effectively deliver lessons) to prepare to
                      deliver instruction.

             3.4.     Implement evidence-based dyslexia interventions that are explicit, systematic
                      and cumulative, multi-sensory/multi-modal, language-based, and aligned to
                      individual student needs as indicated by diagnostic assessments.

             Standard 4: Instruction Using High-Quality Instructional Materials (HQIM)

             Educator candidates shall:

             4.1.     Use content knowledge about literacy to support literacy instruction and
                      assessment that incorporates all students’ literacy strengths and needs.

             4.2.     Set measurable and explicit goals for literacy according to knowledge about each
                      student.

             4.3.     Provide scaffolded instruction that supports students’ strengths and access to
                      grade-level standards while addressing their instructional needs.

             4.4.     Make evidence-based judgments, including what has not been working for a
                      student and what might work more successfully, in order to support continuous
                      individual literacy progress for all students.

             4.5.     Enact evidence-based instructional practices (e.g., interactive think-aloud and
                      modeling, asking varied and high-quality questions, scaffolding within the gradual
                      release of teacher responsibility procedures) that build a wide range of strategies
                      for comprehending, interpreting, evaluating, and appreciating texts while
                      promoting motivation and active engagement in reading and writing.

             4.6.     Enact evidence-based instructional strategies (e.g., scaffolding the writing
                      process) and practices that help students employ a wide range of strategies to
                      write and communicate effectively with different audiences for a variety of
                      purposes.

             4.7.     Enact evidence-based instructional strategies that teach and reinforce reasoning,
                      strategic problem-solving, and metacognition within reading and writing.


Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                      Page 11 of 64
                     TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                             5.505
 PREPARATION


             4.8.     Analyze texts for complexity, quality, and alignment to instructional goals and
                      student readiness; select a wide range of appropriately complex texts.

             4.9.     Engage and support students in reading a wide range of complex texts in print,
                      digital, and multiple media formats.

             4.10.    Engage students appropriately with disciplinary texts so that they are able to
                      critically evaluate key ideas and details, work with the varying craft, structure,
                      and complexity of disciplinary texts, and integrate knowledge and text details as
                      they build conceptual knowledge.

             4.11.    Create and implement culturally relevant and responsive instruction and
                      assessments to address the strengths and needs of all students with particular
                      attention to students’ diverse cultural and linguistic resources.

             4.12.    Provide appropriate and scaffolded language and literacy instruction for students
                      whose first language is not English so that they can be successful academically
                      (e.g., develop an understanding of the content across the curriculum while they
                      learn English)

             4.13.    Provide appropriate and scaffolded language and literacy instruction for students
                      with disabilities to provide equitable access and participation.

             4.14.    Provide appropriate and scaffolded language and literacy instruction for students
                      with characteristics of dyslexia that include evidence-based dyslexia
                      interventions.

             4.15.    Employ instructional grouping arrangements (e.g., individual, pairs, small groups,
                      whole group, ability based, interest, instructional need) in ways that maximize
                      students’ growth in literacy.

             Standard 5: Foundational Literacy Skills Assessment and Evaluation

             Educator candidates shall:

             5.1.     Understand the use of the Tennessee Universal Reading Screener and the State
                      Board approved universal screeners used to identify students who may be at-risk
                      for significant reading deficiency or who have a significant reading deficiency and
                      who require further assessment and intervention.

             5.2.     Show proficiency in the administration and scoring of the Tennessee Universal
                      Reading Screener or State Board approved universal reading screener.



Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                       Page 12 of 64
                    TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                             5.505
 PREPARATION


             5.3.     Demonstrate the ability to interpret universal reading screening data to identify
                      students who might be “at risk” of a reading deficiency (below 40th percentile on
                      composite score) or display a reading deficiency (below the 16th percentile on
                      composite score) as designated by the Tennessee Literacy Success Act.

             5.4.     Understand that the role of the school data teams is to consider the results of the
                      universal reading screener in conjunction with other data to identify students
                      who may be in need of tiered interventions through the RTI2 process in the areas
                      of basic reading, reading fluency, and reading comprehension, and who require
                      dyslexia-specific interventions due to exhibiting characteristics of dyslexia,
                      pursuant to T.C.A. § 49-1-229

             5.5.     Examine student screener profiles to identify the need for additional diagnostic
                      assessments to inform intervention decisions.

             5.6.     Understand the requirements of progress monitoring within the RTI2 Framework
                      and use data to determine the effectiveness of tiered interventions.

             5.7.     Understand how students are screened for characteristics of dyslexia and of the
                      areas commonly associated with dyslexia as part of that screening: phonological
                      awareness, phonemic awareness, alphabet knowledge, sound symbol
                      recognition, decoding skills, encoding skills, rapid naming, and reading fluency.

             5.8.     Implement foundational literacy skills assessment and evaluation tools
                      appropriately and for different purposes to inform literacy instruction and
                      intervention, including diagnostic assessments (“Diagnostic” or “Survey Level
                      Assessment”) and progress monitoring assessments.

                      (a)     Universal Screener assessment – assessments or subtests that are valid,
                              reliable, fair, nationally normed, and backed by scientifically based
                              reading research. These assessments are a brief procedure designed as a
                              first step in identifying students who may be considered at-risk of
                              academic failure, including: students who possess a significant reading
                              deficiency and who are in need of further diagnostic- or survey-level
                              assessment and additional interventions; students in need of additional
                              remediation; and students who may benefit from enrichment. These
                              assessments are not used to diagnose specific skill gaps; rather, these
                              assessments help to identify children who need diagnostic assessments,
                              as well as children who may require supplemental intervention and/or
                              enrichment. Screening assessments should be relatively fast and efficient
                              to administer.



Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                       Page 13 of 64
                     TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                             5.505
 PREPARATION


                      (b)     Diagnostic assessment– assessments for better understanding student
                              skill development needs, building upon Screener results to provide in-
                              depth analysis of specific reading deficiency that can be used to prescribe
                              interventions.

                      (c)     Survey level assessment – assessment used for determining progress
                              monitoring levels for a student who is significantly below grade level.

                      (d)     Progress Monitoring assessment- Progress monitoring is used to assess
                              students' academic performance, to quantify a student’s rate of
                              improvement or responsiveness to instruction, and to evaluate the
                              effectiveness of instruction. Unlike Screeners, Progress Monitoring
                              Assessments must be sensitive to growth and require multiple forms.
                              These assess students’ specific reading skills and have a direct, reliable,
                              and valid relationship to Diagnostic and Screener Assessments to show
                              progress on shared measurement areas.

             5.9.     Select and implement additional literacy assessment and evaluation tools
                      appropriately and for different purposes (e.g., universal reading screeners,
                      curriculum-based, formative or benchmark, and summative or outcome) to
                      inform literacy instruction and intervention.

             5.10.    Describe how literacy assessment connects to and supports planning appropriate
                      and scaffolded instruction within the classroom and within the RTI2 framework
                      and in accordance with T.C.A. § 49-1-229.

             5.11.    Select and implement valid, reliable, and appropriate assessments to obtain
                      information on student language acquisition and literacy development; select
                      assessments that are free from explicit or implicit cultural bias.

             5.12.    Select and implement diagnostic assessments to identify students’ literacy
                      strengths and needs in areas of knowledge and vocabulary development, text
                      comprehension, and skill and strategy development.

             5.13.    Analyze students’ cultural and experiential differences through a critical analysis
                      of diagnostic data to identify what students understand about the literacy tasks,
                      such as comprehending texts, and how they come to those understandings
                      (information and strategies they are using).

             5.14.    Interpret literacy assessment data effectively in order to reflect upon, design, and
                      re-design instruction and interventions according to the data This includes
                      making data-based decisions about providing explicit, systemic instruction with


Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                       Page 14 of 64
                     TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                              5.505
 PREPARATION


                      carefully applied scaffolds that are appropriate to address identified instructional
                      goals.

             5.15.    Interpret foundational literacy skills assessment data effectively in order to
                      reflect upon design, and re-design evidence-based interventions that are
                      appropriate for at-home instruction. This includes providing families with
                      information, ideas, and no-cost resources to support students’ areas of need at
                      home.

             5.16.    Develop student intervention plans (SIPs), including Individualized Learning Plans
                      for Characteristics of Dyslexia (ILP-Ds) pursuant to State Board Rule 0520-01-22,
                      that target students’ identified literacy deficits and identify intervention
                      (including dyslexia-specific) and appropriate supports to access core instruction.

             5.17.    Communicate and present literacy assessment information effectively, in oral and
                      written form, to various audiences (e.g., other professionals, administrators,
                      students, and parents).

             5.18.    Communicate and collaborate effectively with peers, assessment team members,
                      and reading and other specialists to select appropriate assessments and interpret
                      data to inform instructional planning for students experiencing literacy
                      difficulties.

             5.19.    Communicate and collaborate effectively with reading and bilingual specialists to
                      design, implement, and interpret data from appropriate assessments for English
                      Learners.

             Standard 6: Professional Learning and Leadership

             Educator candidates shall:

             6.1.     Engage within professional learning communities in evidence-based inquiry and
                      decision making grounded in theories of literacy and literacy practices.

             6.2.     Critically evaluate and use relevant research to collaboratively plan, differentiate,
                      and evaluate literacy instruction within grade-level and/or subject matter teams.

             6.3.     Engage in professional learning that is inclusive and collaborative, and focused on
                      building relationships with students, parents, teachers, and others in the
                      community around student literacy strengths and needs, out of school
                      experiences, and literacy activity.

             6.4.     Be prepared to participate in professional learning about literacy that is job-
                      embedded, builds trust, and empowers teachers and others.

Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                        Page 15 of 64
                    TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                             5.505
 PREPARATION


             6.5.     Be prepared to self-direct their own professional learning by generating questions
                      and identifying problems for further study and set their own personal goals.

             6.6.     Be prepared to engage in a reflective cycle of professional learning, utilizing
                      constructive feedback for continuing professional growth.

             6.7.     Engage in professional learning based on their professional questions, their
                      content and/or literacy expertise, and their leadership and communication skills.

             6.8.     Implement and assess professional learning with regard to alignment of curricular
                      outcomes in literacy as well as educator performance and student achievement
                      with curriculum standards in literacy.

             Standard 7: Trauma-Informed Concepts

             To ensure that students can effectively access reading instruction, educator candidates
             must demonstrate knowledge of core concepts of trauma informed teaching and
             learning, such as brain development and architecture, toxic stress, “serve and return”
             interaction, and resilience. This includes but is not limited to: Adverse Childhood
             Experiences (ACEs), strategies for self-regulation, and secondary traumatic stress.


             Standard 8: Trauma-Informed Discipline Practices

             To ensure students can effectively access reading instruction, educator candidates must
             demonstrate knowledge of trauma-informed discipline practices, including practices such
             as:

             8.1.     Effective and engaging instruction and classroom/behavior management.

             8.2.     Accomplishing school discipline by preventing misbehavior before it occurs and
                      using positive, safe, and respectful interventions after it occurs.

             8.3.     Holding students accountable without compromising school safety, respect, and
                      dignity.

             8.4.     Using disciplinary actions that foster awareness of behavioral patterns and trigger
                      and restore relationships with peers and adults in the school community.

             8.5.     Building positive relationships with students and referring students to
                      appropriate mental health supports when needed.




Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                       Page 16 of 64
                    TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                            5.505
 PREPARATION


             8.6.     Understanding the potential effects of adversity and trauma on student behavior
                      and considering the reasons behind negative behaviors when determining
                      disciplinary action.

             8.7.     Avoiding re-traumatizing students by eliminating the use of potentially traumatic,
                      violent, or shaming disciplinary practices.

             8.8.     Offering students an opportunity to learn from their mistakes to re-engage the
                      student in learning.

      (2)    Middle and Secondary Education Literacy Standards. The following literacy standards
             shall be implemented in all programs that lead to endorsement in:

             Middle Grades Mathematics 6-8;

             Middle and Early Secondary Grades Mathematics 6-10;

             Secondary Mathematics 6-12;

             Middle Grades Science 6–8; .

             Secondary Science Disciplines 6–12;

             Middle Grades Social Studies 6–8;

             Secondary Social Studies Disciplines 6–12;

             World Languages pre-K–12;

             Secondary World Languages 6–12;

             College, Career, and Technical Education – Academic 6–12 and K–12;

             College, Career, and Technical Education – Occupational 6–12;

             Visual and Performing Arts K–12;

             Health and Physical Education K–12; and

             Reading Specialist K–12.

             Standard 1: Discipline-Specific Skills



Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                      Page 17 of 64
                    TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                           5.505
 PREPARATION


             1.1.     Candidates will attain and demonstrate a deep understanding of discipline-
                      specific literacy skills and strategies and how they apply to discipline-specific
                      instruction and learning for K-12 students.

            Standard 2: Vocabulary Knowledge and Acquisition

            2.1.      Candidates will understand discipline-specific academic vocabulary and
                      demonstrate the ability to communicate using vocabulary accurately and
                      effectively.

            Standard 3: K-12 Student Focus

             3.1.     Candidates will demonstrate the ability to prepare K-12 students to acquire and
                      comprehend information through reading, viewing, listening, speaking, and
                      writing connected to discipline-specific sources.

             3.2.     Candidates will demonstrate the ability to prepare K-12 students to effectively
                      engage in communication of discipline-specific information through reading,
                      viewing, listening, speaking, and writing.

      (3)    English Language Arts Literacy Standards. The following literacy standards shall be
             implemented in all programs that lead to endorsement in English Language Arts 6–8; and
             English 6–12.

             Standard 1: Content Knowledge

             1.1.     Knowledge of English Language Arts Development. Educator candidates must
                      demonstrate their knowledge of theoretical and research-based instructional
                      practices related to middle grade and high school students’ literacy development,
                      including knowledge of:

                      (a)     Theoretical and research-based foundations of disciplinary literacy,
                              writing, and communication development;

                      (b)     Cognitive, linguistic, motivational, and sociocultural foundations of
                              reading, writing, speaking, and listening development;

                      (c)     Students’ birth through high school literacy development (with deeper
                              emphasis on middle and high school), including integrated knowledge of
                              the development of foundational skills (word learning skills, phonics,
                              decoding, and fluency), language and vocabulary development, and text
                              comprehension;



Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                     Page 18 of 64
                    TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                             5.505
 PREPARATION


                      (d)    Methods of purposeful text selection to support comprehension and
                             reasoning applied to multiple genres, disciplines, and formats (e.g., print,
                             digital, visual, and multimodal) and texts that are representative of
                             diverse cultural and linguistic experiences of students;

                      (e)    Reciprocity between reading, writing, speaking, and listening;

                      (f)    Writing process, basic writing components (e.g., grammar conventions,
                             word choice), composition of different text types (e.g., narrative,
                             informative/explanatory, argument), writing in disciplinary domains, use
                             of writing as a means to communicate with different audiences and for
                             multiple purposes, and use of writing to facilitate learning (e.g., research,
                             note- taking);

                      (g)    Communication processes that include abilities to interpret information,
                             demonstrate effective reasoning, generate evidence to support
                             arguments, and present information in different formats, including print
                             and multi-modal formats;

                      (h)    Students’ cultural and linguistic (e.g., different dialects, languages other
                             than English) histories as a resource for literacy development and
                             instruction; and

                      (i)    Developmentally appropriate instructional practices that are responsive
                             to diversity of all forms and that support equitable learning opportunities
                             and success of all students.

             1.2.     Key Ideas and Details. Educator candidates must demonstrate their knowledge
                      and mastery of the skills to prepare students to:

                      (a)    Read closely and answer text-dependent questions to determine what a
                             text says explicitly and to generate logical inferences, and cite specific
                             textual evidence when writing or speaking to support conclusions drawn
                             from a text;

                      (b)    Determine central ideas or themes of a text and analyze their
                             development; summarizing the key supporting details and ideas; and

                      (c)    Analyze how and why individuals, events, and ideas develop and interact
                             over the course of a text.

             1.3.     Vocabulary Knowledge and Acquisition. Educator candidates must demonstrate
                      their knowledge and mastery of the skills to prepare students to:


Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                       Page 19 of 64
                    TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                            5.505
 PREPARATION


                      (a)     Acquire and accurately use advanced word study (morphology,
                              syllabication, study of word parts, regular word reading, irregular word
                              reading, entomology, Greek and Latin roots, and inflectional endings) and
                              demonstrate how these impact text comprehension and oral and written
                              communication;

                      (b)     Acquire and accurately use general academic and disciplinary-specific
                              words and phrases necessary for comprehension and communication
                              about complex texts and that meet the demands for reading, writing,
                              speaking, and listening in post-secondary and the workforce;

                      (c)     Interpret words and phrases as they are used in a text, including
                              technical, connotative, and figurative meanings and analyzing how
                              specific word choices shape meaning or tone; and

                      (d)     Differentiate how language functions in different contexts (based on
                              audience, purpose, form, and mode of expression).

             1.4.     Craft and Structure of the Language of Texts (including print, visual, multimodal,
                      and digital texts). Educator candidates must demonstrate their knowledge and
                      mastery of the skills to prepare students to:

                      (a)     Analyze the structure of texts and how specific sentences, paragraphs,
                              and larger portions of a text (e.g., a section, chapter, scene, or stanza)
                              relate to each other and the whole; and

                      (b)     Assess how point of view and purpose shape the content and style of a
                              text.

             1.5.     Integration of Knowledge and Ideas (including print, visual, multimodal, and
                      digital texts). Educator candidates must demonstrate their knowledge and
                      mastery of the skills to prepare students to:

                      (a)     Integrate and evaluate content presented in diverse formats and media,
                              including content presented visually and quantitatively, as well as in word
                              form;

                      (b)     Delineate and evaluate the argument and specific claims in a text,
                              including the validity of the reasoning as well as the relevance and
                              sufficiency of the evidence; and

                      (c)     Analyze how two or more texts address similar themes or topics in order
                              to build knowledge or to compare, contrast, analyze, or explain the
                              approaches different authors take.

Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                      Page 20 of 64
                    TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                            5.505
 PREPARATION


             1.6.     Speaking and Listening. Educator candidates must demonstrate their knowledge
                      and mastery of the skills to prepare students to:

                      (a)    Participate effectively in a range of conversations and collaborations with
                             varied partners, building on others’ ideas and expressing their own ideas
                             clearly and persuasively;

                      (b)    Evaluate a speaker’s point of view, reasoning, use of evidence and
                             rhetoric;

                      (c)    Demonstrate comprehension regarding information presented orally in a
                             range of settings and from diverse speakers (e.g., directions, texts,
                             presentations, and videos);

                      (d)    Ethically research and present information, findings, and supporting
                             evidence such that listeners can follow the line of reasoning, argument,
                             or interpretation;

                      (e)    Ensure that the organization, development, and style of communication
                             are appropriate to the task, purpose, and audience, adapting speech to a
                             variety of contexts and communicative tasks, demonstrating command
                             of formal English when indicated or appropriate; and

                      (f)    Make strategic use of texts, digital media, and visual displays of data to
                             express information and enhance understanding of presentations.

             1.7.     Writing. Educator candidates must demonstrate their knowledge and mastery of
                      the skills that students need to be taught to:

                      (a)    Articulate the purpose (i.e., to communicate ideas to be understood by
                             others) and subsequent style and structure (e.g., formal, informal,
                             creative, expository, etc.) for writing;

                      (b)    Articulate that writing is a process that involves actions such as
                             brainstorming, revising, editing, and publishing, and not just a product;
                             engage in writing as a process;

                      (c)    Write arguments to support claims in an analysis of substantive topics or
                             texts, using valid reasoning and relevant and sufficient evidence;

                      (d)    Write informative/explanatory texts to examine and convey complex
                             ideas and information clearly and accurately through the effective
                             selection, organization, and analysis of content;


Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                     Page 21 of 64
                    TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                          5.505
 PREPARATION


                      (e)    Write narratives to develop real or imagined experiences or events using
                             effective techniques, well-chosen details, and well-structured event
                             sequences;

                      (f)    Use understandings of the craft and structure of texts to convey ideas in
                             writing for different purposes and audiences;

                      (g)    Produce clear and coherent writing in which the development and
                             organization are appropriate to the task, purpose, and audience;

                      (h)    Develop and strengthen writing as needed by planning, revising, editing,
                             rewriting, or trying a new approach;

                      (i)    Use technology, including the internet, to produce and publish writing
                             and to interact and collaborate with others;

                      (j)    Integrate relevant and credible information from multiple print and
                             digital sources using ethical writing and citation practices;

                      (k)    Draw evidence from literary or informational texts to support analysis,
                             reflection, and research;

                      (l)    Recognize the unique demands of various writing tasks (i.e. extended
                             time tasks, shorter on demand tasks for different purposes) and employ
                             specific strategies for a range of tasks, purposes, and audiences;

                      (m)    Conduct short as well as more sustained research projects based on focus
                             questions, demonstrating new understanding of the subject under
                             investigation; and

                      (n)    Apply conventions of standard English grammar and usage when
                             speaking and conventions of standard English grammar and usage,
                             including capitalization and punctuation, when writing.

             Standard 2: Language and Literacy Rich Environment

             ELA educator candidates shall:

             2.1.     Demonstrate and apply knowledge of linguistic diversity as a cultural and
                      educational asset; recognize it as a source of strength in society to be
                      encourage(d)




Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                    Page 22 of 64
                    TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                             5.505
 PREPARATION


             2.2.     Incorporate disciplinary and instructional texts representing diverse students,
                      multiple genres, perspectives, and media necessary to prepare all students for
                      literacy tasks for the 21st century.

             2.3.     Establish literacy-rich classroom environments that support individual and
                      collaborative learning, with (1) routines and structures that prompt frequent
                      language interactions with peers and (2) varied language representations that
                      provide resources for literacy development (e.g., anchor posters, graphic
                      organizers, and dictionaries).

             2.4.     Position and support students as knowledgeable and valuable contributors of
                      information (e.g., cooperative speaking opportunities, text-based discussions
                      using evidence) with disciplinary language practices that allow all students to
                      participate, regardless of their speaking or writing proficiency.

             Standard 3: Curriculum and Instruction

             ELA educator candidates shall:

             3.1.     Create units of study that integrate multiple standards to build students’
                      conceptual knowledge in order to meet grade level expectations.

             3.2.     Use available resources and knowledge about how learners, including English
                      Learners, process information to differentiate instruction in order to support
                      students’ abilities to access and produce information, while addressing their
                      instructional needs (and continually provide cognitive stretch so that students are
                      achieving beyond minimal expectations).

             3.3.     Make evidence-based judgments (based on multiple forms of evidence), to
                      identified learning needs and set measurable and explicit goals for literacy
                      according to knowledge about each student.

             3.4.     Enact evidence-based instructional practices (e.g., interactive think-aloud and
                      modeling, asking varied and high quality questions, scaffolding within gradual
                      release of teacher responsibility procedures, use of mentor texts) that:

                      (a)     Build a wide range of strategies for comprehending, interpreting, and
                              evaluating texts while promoting motivation and active engagement in
                              reading and writing;

                      (b)     Help students employ a wide range of strategies to write and
                              communicate effectively with different audiences for a variety of
                              purposes; and


Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                       Page 23 of 64
                     TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                             5.505
 PREPARATION


                      (c)     Teach and reinforce reasoning, strategic problem-solving, and
                              metacognition within reading and writing.

             3.5.     Analyze a wide range of complex texts in print, digital, and multiple media formats
                      for complexity, quality, and alignment to instructional goals and student
                      readiness; select a wide range of appropriately complex texts and teach students
                      to read, comprehend, and use grade level or above complex text independently
                      and proficiently recognizing various text structures and employing specific
                      comprehension strategies in support of knowledge building around text, which
                      includes literature, literary nonfiction, and informational text.

             3.6.     Create and implement culturally relevant and responsive instruction and
                      assessments to address the strengths and needs of all students with particular
                      attention to students’ diverse cultural and linguistic resources.

             Standard 4: Assessment and Evaluation

             ELA educator candidates shall:

             4.1.     Describe how literacy assessment connects to and supports planning appropriate
                      and differentiated instruction within the classroom and within the RTI²
                      framework.

              4.2.    Design and use rigorous, authentic, performance-based tasks that integrate
                      multiple standards and allow students to demonstrate mastery of the grade level
                      expectations related to the standards.

             4.3.     Analyze and interpret the appropriate context, uses, and limitations of literacy
                      assessments and evaluation tools in all categories (e.g., screening, diagnostic,
                      curriculum based, progress monitoring, formative or benchmark, and summative
                      or outcome) to inform literacy instruction and intervention.

             4.4.     Identify data-based trends that surface patterns related to students who are not
                      progressing and provide a wide range of texts and instruction responsive to
                      identified needs.

             4.5.     Analyze students’ cultural and experiential differences through a critical analysis
                      of diagnostic data to identify what students understand about the literacy tasks,
                      such as comprehending texts, and how they come to those understandings
                      (information and strategies they are using).

             4.6.     Communicate and present literacy assessment information effectively, in oral and
                      written form, to various audiences (e.g., other professionals, administrators,
                      students, and parents).

Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                       Page 24 of 64
                    TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                              5.505
 PREPARATION


             4.7.     Communicate and collaborate effectively with peers, assessment team members,
                      reading and other specialists to select appropriate assessments and interpret
                      data to inform instructional planning for the range of learners, including those
                      who are experiencing literacy difficulties, those with advanced achievement or
                      identified as gifted, or English Language Learners.

             Standard 5: Professional Learning and Leadership

             5.1.     ELA educator candidates: Engage in professional learning (individually or in
                      collaboration with literacy partners who provide feedback) related to literacy that
                      supports the area of expertise, with attention to standards-based literacy
                      curriculum, effective instructional practices, and assessment (particularly
                      diagnostic assessments).

      (4)    Literacy Standards for Instructional Leader Preparation

             Instructional Leader Candidates shall:

             (a)      Demonstrate a foundational understanding of content and pedagogical
                      knowledge of literacy instruction in order to support teachers in:

                      1.      Effective instruction in foundational literacy skills including phonemic
                              awareness, phonics, fluency, vocabulary, and comprehension.

                      2.      Providing instruction for students with advanced reading skills and
                              students with significant reading deficiencies through access points and
                              instructional scaffolds.

                      3.      Identify the characteristics of dyslexia and provide effective instruction
                              for teaching students with these characteristics using evidence-based,
                              multisensory interventions.

             (b)      Demonstrate a foundational understanding of the impact and process of literacy
                      acquisition and child development as it relates to the uniqueness of each student
                      (e.g. culture, socioeconomic status, ability) and be able to support instruction that
                      responds to these differences.

             (c)      Create and support a school culture and environment that:

                      1.      Sees language diversity as a strength;

                      2.      Values and uses diverse literacy resources; and

                      3.      Provides all readers with access to highly effective teachers.

Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                        Page 25 of 64
                   TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                             5.505
 PREPARATION


             (d)      Through a shared vision, collaboratively develop evidence-based literacy goals for
                      the purpose of increasing student achievement.

             (e)      Employ effective human and fiscal resources that align to the shared vision and
                      evidence-based goals related to literacy.

             (f)      Modify scheduling, staffing, and instructional groupings as a means to maximize
                      student growth in literacy.

             (g)      Identify purposeful and appropriate data-driven assessments (including
                      screeners, diagnostic, and progress monitoring) based on student literacy data
                      and demonstrate an understanding of how to support the implementation of
                      appropriate interventions and improve reading instruction for students.

             (h)      Identify purposeful and appropriate assessments (including screeners, diagnostic,
                      and progress monitoring for characteristics of dyslexia and demonstrate an
                      understanding of how to support the implementation of appropriate
                      interventions.

             (i)      Use, and recognize the importance of, outcome data in developing and
                      implementing evidence-based school structures and policies that support student
                      growth in literacy. Specifically, leaders should be prepared to facilitate teams in
                      the analysis and interpretation of relevant literacy data to inform decision making
                      (e.g., intervention selection, intervention placement, professional development
                      goals, etc.)

             (j)      Support the development and planning of professional learning activities that are
                      grounded in effective evidence-based practices of literacy and high-quality
                      instructional materials.

             (k)      Ensure professional learning opportunities for educators related to literacy are
                      grounded in formative and summative data, differentiated, build capacity of all
                      educators, and are on-going and sustainable.

             (l)      Describe design principles of high-quality instructional materials in English
                      language arts and literacy, including the use of evidence-based practices;
                      alignment to grade-level standards; coherent progressions of content and tasks;
                      and access points supporting all students to engage meaningfully in grade-
                      appropriate learning centered on complex texts.

             (m)      Support teachers to implement high-quality instructional materials with integrity
                      to their design principles, choosing instructional scaffolds and supports matched
                      to individual students’ strengths and needs while maintaining grade-appropriate
                      rigor and alignment to Tennessee Academic Standards in all literacy instruction.

Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                       Page 26 of 64
                   TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                             5.505
 PREPARATION


             (n)      Support teachers to use unit and lesson preparation protocols focused on
                      intellectual preparation (i.e., a focused form of lesson preparation that helps a
                      teacher prepare to teach using existing lesson plans within high-quality
                      instructional materials in lieu of creating their own lesson plans outside of the
                      adopted high-quality instructional materials) and internalization of high-quality
                      instructional materials (i.e., the act of teacher practicing the lessons with HQIM
                      to effectively deliver lessons) to prepare lessons that adequately meet the diverse
                      literacy needs of all students.

             (o)      Support teachers to implement dyslexia-specific interventions with integrity by
                      choosing the appropriate interventions matched to the student’s individual
                      needs.

             (p)      Demonstrate knowledge of core concepts of development, such as brain
                      development and architecture, toxic stress, “serve and return” interaction, and
                      resilience. Candidates must also be familiar with Adverse Childhood Experiences
                      (ACEs), strategies to deescalate, and secondary traumatic stress.

             (q)      Demonstrate knowledge of trauma informed discipline practices to ensure
                      students can access reading instruction, including principles such as:

                      1.      Effective and engaging instruction and classroom/behavior management.

                      2.      Accomplishing school discipline by preventing misbehavior before it
                              occurs and using positive, safe, and respectful interventions after it
                              occurs.

                      3.      Holding students accountable without compromising school safety,
                              respect, and dignity.

                      4.      Using disciplinary actions that foster awareness of behavioral patterns
                              and trigger and restore relationships with peers and adults in the school
                              community.

                      5.      Building positive relationships with students and referring students to
                              appropriate mental health supports when needed.

                      6.      Understanding the potential effects of adversity and trauma on student
                              behavior and considering the reasons behind negative behaviors when
                              determining disciplinary action.

                      7.      Avoiding re-traumatizing students by eliminating the use of potentially
                              traumatic, violent, or shaming disciplinary practices.


Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                      Page 27 of 64
                   TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
  LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                          5.505
  PREPARATION


                      8.     Offering students an opportunity to learn from their mistakes to re-
                             engage the student in learning.

             (r)      Demonstrate knowledge of effective trauma informed discipline policies, that:

                      1.     Balance accountability with an understanding of traumatic behavior;

                      2.     Teach school and classroom rules while reinforcing that violent or abusive
                             behavior is not allowed at school;

                      3.     Minimize disruptions to the educational environment with an emphasis
                             on positive behavioral supports and behavioral intervention plans;

                      4.     Create consistent rules and consequences; and

                      5.     Model respectful, non-violent relationships.


II.   Specialty Area Program Standards

      Educators shall be prepared to deliver instruction that enables students to master Tennessee
      academic standards. EPPs shall align coursework, clinical experiences, and candidate assessment
      systems to the appropriate specialty area standards.

      Early Childhood Education

      (1)    Early Childhood Education

             (a)      Approved programs for early childhood education lead to licensure and
                      endorsement in Early Childhood Education pre-K–3.

             (b)      Program components

                      1.     Candidates in early childhood education shall complete a major in
                             childhood development, or other education related content area that
                             includes coursework in the arts and sciences disciplines. Examples
                             include:
                             (i)      An interdisciplinary major that includes English, mathematics,
                                      science, and social studies.
                             (ii)     An interdisciplinary major in human development and learning
                                      that draws upon fields such as psychology, sociology, cultural
                                      anthropology, biology, or child development.



Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                     Page 28 of 64
                   TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                            5.505
 PREPARATION


                             (iii)   A major in a single discipline such as child development and
                                     family studies, human growth and development, or
                                     developmental psychology.

                      2.     EPPs shall provide candidates with clinical practice in both birth through
                             age four (4) and kindergarten through grade three (K-3) to the extent
                             possible. Candidates who do not have a clinical practice in birth through
                             age four (4) must have a kindergarten clinical experience.

                      3.     EPPs shall include clinical experiences where candidates are mentored by
                             qualified literacy educators and that provide candidates with literacy
                             teaching experiences with whole class, small group, one-to-one
                             instruction, and community and family-based programs.

             (c)      Specialty Area Standards

                      1.     Educator preparation programs in Early Development and Learning
                             Education shall be aligned to the National Association for the Education
                             of Young Children (NAEYC) Professional Standards and Competencies for
                             Early Childhood Educators.

      (2)    Early Development and Learning Education

             (a)      Approved programs for early development and learning education lead to
                      licensure and endorsement in Early Development and Learning pre-K–K.

             (b)      Program components

                      1.     Candidates in early development and learning shall have an
                             interdisciplinary major in special education, child development, or other
                             education related content are(a)

                      2.     Field experiences shall involve a variety of settings, including home-
                             based, clinical or center-based, and public school-based settings. At least
                             one (1) of the settings must be in an inclusive environment.

                      3.     Candidates shall complete clinical practice in infant/toddler, pre-
                             kindergarten, or kindergarten placements.

                      4.     EPPs shall include clinical experiences where candidates are mentored by
                             qualified literacy educators and that provide candidates with literacy
                             teaching experiences with whole class, small group, one-to-one
                             instruction, and community and family-based programs.


Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                     Page 29 of 64
                   TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                             5.505
 PREPARATION


             (c)      Specialty Area Standards

                      1.     Educator preparation programs in Early Development and Learning
                             Education shall be aligned to the National Association for the Education
                             of Young Children (NAEYC) Professional Standards and Competencies for
                             Early Childhood Educators and the Council for Exceptional Children (CEC)
                             Initial Preparation Standards.

      (3)    Integrated Early Childhood Education Birth-Kindergarten

             (a)      Approved programs for integrated early childhood education lead to licensure
                      and endorsement in Integrated Early Childhood Education Birth – Kindergarten.

             (b)      Approved programs for licensure and endorsement in Integrated Early Childhood
                      Education Birth-Kindergarten may recommend candidates for initial licensure in
                      Early Development and Learning pre-K–K.

             (c)      Program components

                      1.     Candidates must progress through a series of planned clinical
                             experiences for the early childhood age ranges (birth to age three (3) and
                             three (3) through five (5) years), range of abilities, and in the variety of
                             collaborative and inclusive early childhood settings that are appropriate
                             to their endorsement and roles (e.g., home-based, clinical or center-
                             based, public school-based settings). Clinical experiences must take place
                             in both age ranges (birth to age three (3) and three (3) through five (5)
                             years) covered by the endorsement.

                      2.     Candidates in integrated early childhood and special education programs
                             shall complete coursework with an emphasis in special education and
                             child development.

                      3.     Programs shall be designed with a significant focus on the integration of
                             Early Childhood and Special Education preparation and include:
                             (i)     Early childhood and special education instruction and
                                     assessment content should be taught together in each course
                                     rather than taught in isolated programming.
                             (ii)    Assignments should provide opportunities for candidates to
                                     apply knowledge of child development, responsive learning
                                     environment, grade level academic standards, high quality
                                     instructional materials, and instructional access points for all
                                     learners (e.g., English Learners, students with disabilities, and at-
                                     risk learners).


Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                       Page 30 of 64
                   TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                          5.505
 PREPARATION


                             (iii)   EPPs shall provide integrated early childhood and special
                                     education clinical experiences.

                      4.     Programs should reference the Division for Early Childhood (DEC) Initial
                             Practice-Based Professional Preparation Standards for Early
                             Interventionist/Early Childhood Special Educators (EI/ECSE).

                      5.     Programs should reference the National Association for the Education of
                             Young Children (NAEYC) Professional Standards and Competencies for
                             Early Childhood Educators.

                      6.     Programs should reference the National Association for the Education of
                             Young Children (NAEYC) Developmentally Appropriate Practices.

             (d)      Specialty Area Standards

                      1.     Educator preparation programs in Integrated Early Childhood Education
                             Birth-K programs shall align with the National Association for the
                             Education of Young Children (NAEYC) Professional Standards and
                             Competencies for Early Childhood Educators and the CEC Initial Practice-
                             Based Professional Preparation Standards for Early Interventionists/Early
                             Childhood Special Educators (EI/ECSE).

      (4)    Integrated Early Childhood Education pre-K-3

             (a)      Approved programs for integrated early childhood education lead to licensure
                      and endorsement in Integrated Early Childhood Education pre-K-3.

             (b)      Approved programs for licensure and endorsement in Integrated Early Childhood
                      Education pre-K-3 may recommend candidates for initial licensure in Early
                      Childhood Education, Early Development and Learning pre-K–K, or Special
                      Education Early Childhood.

             (c)      Program components

                      1.     Candidates must progress through a series of planned clinical
                             experiences for the early childhood preschool (ages three (3)- five (5))
                             and school-age (kindergarten-third grade), range of abilities, and in the
                             variety of collaborative and inclusive early childhood settings that are
                             appropriate to their endorsement and roles (e.g., home-based, clinical or
                             center-based, public school-based settings). Clinical experiences must
                             take place in both preschool (ages three (3) – five (5)) and school-age
                             (kindergarten-third grade) settings covered by the endorsement.


Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                    Page 31 of 64
                   TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                            5.505
 PREPARATION


                      2.     Candidates in integrated early childhood and special education programs
                             shall complete coursework with an emphasis in special education and
                             child development.

                      3.     Programs are designed with a significant focus on the integration of Early
                             Childhood and Special Education preparation.
                             (i)    Early childhood and special education instruction and
                                    assessment content are taught together in each course rather
                                    than taught in isolated programming.
                             (ii)   Assignments provide opportunities for candidates to apply
                                    knowledge of child development, responsive learning
                                    environment, grade level academic standards, high quality
                                    instructional materials, and instructional access points for all
                                    learners (e.g., English Learners, students with disabilities, and at-
                                    risk learners).
                             (iii)  EPPs provide integrated early childhood and special education
                                    clinical experiences.

                      4.     Programs should reference the Division for Early Childhood (DEC) Initial
                             Practice-Based Standards for Early Interventionists/Early Childhood
                             Special Educators (EI/ECSE).

                      5.     Programs should reference the National Association for the Education of
                             Young Children (NAEYC) Professional Standards and Competencies for
                             Early Childhood Educators.

                      6.     Programs should reference the National Association for the Education of
                             Young Children (NAEYC) Developmentally Appropriate Practices.

             (d)      Specialty Area Standards

                      1.     Educator preparation programs in Integrated Early Childhood Education
                             pre-K-3 programs shall align with the National Association for the
                             Education of Young Children (NAEYC) Professional Standards and
                             Competencies for Early Childhood Educators. and CEC Initial Practice-
                             Based Professional Preparation Standards for Early Interventionists/Early
                             Childhood Special Educators (EI/ECSE).

      Elementary Education

      (1)    Elementary Education

             (a)      Approved programs for elementary education lead to licensure and endorsement
                      in Elementary Education K–5.

Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                      Page 32 of 64
                   TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                            5.505
 PREPARATION


             (b)      Program components

                      1.     Candidates in elementary education shall complete a major in the arts
                             and sciences disciplines. Examples include:
                             (i)     An interdisciplinary major that includes English, mathematics,
                                     science, and social studies.
                             (ii)    An interdisciplinary major in two (2) disciplines from the arts and
                                     sciences. The major may include any combination of English,
                                     mathematics, science or social studies.
                             (iii)   A major in a single discipline from the arts and sciences.

                      2.     Elementary education programs shall include clinical experiences where
                             candidates are mentored by qualified literacy educators and that provide
                             candidates with literacy teaching experiences with whole class, small
                             group, one-to-one instruction, and community and family-based
                             programs.

             (c)      Specialty Area Standards

                      1.     Educator preparation programs in elementary education shall align with
                             the Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation (CAEP) K-6
                             Elementary Teacher Preparation Standards.

      Middle Grades – Core Academic

      (1)    Middle Grades Education

             (a)      Approved programs for middle grade education lead to licensure and
                      endorsement in English Language Arts 6–8, Mathematics 6–8, Science 6–8, or
                      Social Studies 6–8.

             (b)      Program components

                      1.     Candidates in middle grades education shall complete a major in the arts
                             and sciences disciplines. Examples include:
                             (i)     An interdisciplinary major that includes English, mathematics,
                                     science, and social studies.
                             (ii)    An interdisciplinary major in two (2) disciplines from the arts and
                                     sciences. The major may include any combination of English,
                                     mathematics, science, or social studies.
                             (iii)   A major in a single discipline from the arts and sciences, English,
                                     mathematics, science, or social studies.



Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                     Page 33 of 64
                   TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                            5.505
 PREPARATION


                      2.     Programs approved by the State Board for Mathematics 6-8 may
                             recommend candidates for initial licensure in Mathematics 6-10 provided
                             one (1) of the two (2) required clinical practice placements took place in
                             a 9th or 10th grade classroom.

                      3.     Educator Preparation Providers with programs approved by the State
                             Board for Mathematics 6-8 may develop a program of study for licensed
                             educators and recommend educators for additional endorsement in
                             Mathematics 6-10.

             (c)      Specialty Area Standards

                      1.     Educator preparation programs in middle grades education shall align
                             with the Association for Middle Level Education (AMLE) Teacher
                             Preparation Standards and the applicable content area standards as
                             follows:
                             (i)      National Council of Teachers of English (NCTE) Standards for the
                                      Initial Preparation of Teachers of Secondary English Language
                                      Arts;
                             (ii)     National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM) Standards
                                      for the Preparation of Middle Level Mathematics Teachers;
                             (iii)    National Science Teachers Association (NSTA) Standards for
                                      Science Teacher Preparation; or
                             (iv)     National Council for the Social Studies (NCSS) Standards for Social
                                      Studies Teachers.

      Middle and Early Secondary Grades – Core Academic

      (1)    Mathematics

             (a)      Approved programs for Mathematics education lead to licensure and
                      endorsement in Mathematics 6-10.

             (b)      Program Components:

                      1.     Candidates in Mathematics education shall complete a major in
                             Mathematics.

             (c)      Specialty Area Standards

                      1.     Educator preparation programs in Mathematics 6-10 shall align with the
                             Association for Middle Level Education (AMLE) Teacher Preparation
                             Standards and the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM)
                             Standards for the Preparation of Middle Level Mathematics Teachers and

Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                      Page 34 of 64
                   TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                           5.505
 PREPARATION


                              shall reference applicable standards within the NCTM Standards for the
                              Preparation of Secondary Mathematics Teachers to ensure mathematics
                              content at the early Secondary level is sufficiently covered;

      Middle and Secondary Grades - Core Academic

      (1)    English Language Arts Education

             (a)      Approved programs for English language arts education lead to licensure and
                      endorsement in English 6–12.

             (b)      Program Components:

                      1.      Candidates in English language arts education shall complete a major in
                              English.

                      2.      English language arts programs shall ensure candidates in an English
                              language arts education program have six (6) semester hours of college-
                              level world language instructions or the equivalent, as determined by the
                              EPP.

             (c)      Specialty area standards:

                      1.      Educator preparation programs in English language arts education shall
                              be aligned to the NCTE Standards for the Initial Preparation of Teachers
                              of Secondary English Language Arts.

      (2)    Mathematics Education

             (a)      Approved programs for mathematics education lead to licensure and
                      endorsement in Mathematics 6–12.

             (b)      Program Components:

                      1.      Candidates in mathematics education shall complete a major in
                              mathematics.

                      2.      Mathematics education programs shall include a focus on
                              communication skills that enable candidates to use vocabulary, language,
                              terminology, and grammatical constructions, syntax, and notation
                              specific to professionals in mathematics.

                      3.      Programs approved by the State Board for Mathematics 6-12 may
                              recommend candidates for the Mathematics 6-10 endorsement.

Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                     Page 35 of 64
                   TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                           5.505
 PREPARATION


             (c)      Specialty Area Standards

                      1.     Educator preparation programs in mathematics education shall be
                             aligned to the NCTM Standards for the Preparation of Middle Level
                             Mathematics Teachers and the NCTM Standards for the Preparation of
                             Secondary Mathematics Teachers.

                      2.     Educator Preparation Providers with programs approved by the State
                             Board for Mathematics 6-12 may develop a program of study for licensed
                             educators and recommend educators for additional endorsement in
                             Mathematics 6-10

      (3)    Science Education

             (a)      Approved programs for science education lead to licensure and endorsement in
                      Biology 6–12; Chemistry 6–12; Physics 6–12; or Earth Science 6–12.

             (b)      Program components

                      1.     Candidates in science education shall complete a major in one (1) of the
                             following:
                             (i)     A single science; biology, chemistry, physics, or earth
                                     science/geology
                             (ii)    An interdisciplinary major that includes the equivalent of a minor
                                     in two (2) science disciplines; or
                             (iii)   A cross-disciplinary major including a science and another
                                     appropriate, related discipline, such as physics and math.

                      2.     EPPs shall ensure candidates have an in-depth understanding of the role
                             of the science and engineering practices in processes of inquiry.

             (c)      Specialty Area Standards

                      1.     Educator preparation programs in science education shall be aligned to
                             the NSTA Standards for Science Teacher Preparation.

      (4)    Social Studies Education

             (a)      Approved programs for social studies education lead to licensure and
                      endorsement in History 6–12; Government 6–12; Geography 6–12; Economics 6–
                      12; Psychology 9–12; or Sociology 9–12.

             (b)      Program components


Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                     Page 36 of 64
                   TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                           5.505
 PREPARATION


                      1.     Candidates in social studies education shall complete a major in one (1)
                             of the following:
                             (i)      A single social science;
                             (ii)     An interdisciplinary major that includes the equivalent of a minor
                                      in two (2) social science disciplines; or
                             (iii)    A cross-disciplinary major, including a social science and another
                                      appropriate, related discipline, such as history and a world
                                      language.

             (c)      Specialty Area Standards

                      1.     Educator preparation programs in social sciences education shall be
                             aligned to the NCSS Standards for Social Studies Teachers.

      (5)    Speech Communication

             (a)      Approved programs for speech communication lead to licensure and
                      endorsement in Speech Communication 6–12.

             (b)      Program components

                      1.     Candidates in speech communication shall complete a major in speech
                             communication.

                      2.     Candidates in a dual endorsement in speech communication and theatre
                             program shall major in one (1) of the following:
                             (i)    Speech communication;
                             (ii)   Theatre; or
                             (iii)  An interdisciplinary major in speech communication and theatre.

             (c)      Specialty Area Standards

                      1.     Educator preparation programs in speech communication shall be
                             aligned to the National Communication Association (NCA) Learning
                             Outcomes in Communication.

      (6)    World Languages

             (a)      Approved programs for world languages lead to licensure and endorsement in
                      American Sign Language pre-K–12 and 6–12; Arabic pre-K–12 and 6–12; Chinese
                      pre-K–12 and 6–12; French pre-K–12 and 6–12; German pre-K–12 and 6–12;
                      Greek pre-K–12 and 6–12; Japanese pre-K–12 and 6–12; Latin pre-K–12 and 6–



Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                     Page 37 of 64
                        TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                                        5.505
 PREPARATION


                           12; Russian pre-K–12 and 6–12; Spanish pre-K–12 and 6–12; or Other World
                           Language pre-K–12 and 6–12 1.

                  (b)      Program components

                           1.       Candidates in world language education shall complete a major in the
                                    world language for which they are seeking endorsement.

                           2.       Candidates seeking the pre-k-12 endorsement shall complete clinical
                                    experiences in both kindergarten through grade eight (K–8) and in grades
                                    nine through twelve (9–12). If it is not possible to find clinical experience
                                    opportunities in the target language in elementary grades, then the
                                    entire clinical experience may be in grades nine through twelve (9–12).

                           3.       EPPs shall determine more rigorous requirements for demonstrating
                                    content knowledge for candidates who are native speakers of the
                                    language in which endorsement is being sought.

                           4.       Educator preparation programs for modern languages will include
                                    planned intensive language experiences abroad or interactions in the
                                    United States with people from cultures where the target language is
                                    spoken, including immersion programs.

                           5.       Educator preparation programs for classical languages will provide
                                    opportunities to acquire knowledge of cultural connotations of language
                                    by contact with cultures, literature, and civilizations where the target
                                    language was spoken.

                           6.       EPPs may develop programs for candidates who seek endorsements in
                                    world languages in which they do not offer a major. Such programs shall
                                    meet all requirements for specialty area programs.

                  (c)      Specialty Area Standards

                           1.       Educator preparation programs for world languages shall be aligned to
                                    the ACTFL Program Standards for the Preparation of Foreign Language
                                    Teachers. Programs for American Sign Language shall align with the
                                    American Sign Language Teachers Association (ASLTA) Standards for
                                    Learning American Sign Language.




1 Proposals for programs in Other World Language pre-K-12 and 6-12 require identification of the specific language in

which the candidate will be prepared to teach.

Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                                 Page 38 of 64
                   TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                         5.505
 PREPARATION


      Special Populations

      (1)    All specialty area programs for special education shall be aligned to the Council for
             Exceptional Children (CEC) Initial Practice-Based Professional Preparation Standards for
             Special Educators.

      (2)    Candidates in special education shall have a major in special education or a major in
             approved corresponding general curriculum are(a)

      (3)    Gifted Education

             (a)      Approved programs for Gifted Education lead to licensure and endorsement in
                      Gifted Education pre-K–12.

             (b)      Program components

                      1.     Gifted education may be offered at the undergraduate or graduate level.

                      2.     EPPs may offer a Gifted program as an additional endorsement program
                             even if they do not offer the program for initial licensure.

             (c)      Specialty Area Standards

                      1.     Educator preparation programs for gifted education shall be aligned to
                             the CEC Initial Gifted Education Professional Preparation Standards.

      (4)    Special Education Comprehensive

             (a)      Approved programs for special education comprehensive lead to licensure and
                      endorsement in Special Education Comprehensive Program K–12.

             (b)      Program components

                      1.     Instructional design for vocabulary and word recognition shall
                             incorporate visuals and models and be present throughout instruction
                             across disciplines.

                      2.     Candidates shall demonstrate multiple ways to design instruction for
                             students with complex needs using both narrative and informative texts.

                      3.     During clinical experiences, the candidate shall demonstrate they are
                             proficient in various modes of communication (expressive and receptive)
                             by integrating communication skills, instruction, and devices in the
                             instructional design of foundational literacy and comprehension through
                             reading, listening, viewing, speaking, and writing.


Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                   Page 39 of 64
                   TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                            5.505
 PREPARATION


                      4.     Coursework shall emphasize the application of the CEC standards in
                             instruction to students with Developmental Disabilities and Autism
                             Spectrum Disorder, as well as in Individualized General Curriculum, and
                             for students with Physical, Health, and Multiple Disabilities.

             (c)      Specialty Area Standards

                      1.     Educator preparation programs for special education comprehensive
                             shall be aligned to the CEC Initial K-12 Special Educator Standards

      (5)    Special Education Early Childhood

             (a)      Approved programs for special education early childhood lead to licensure and
                      endorsement in Special Education Early Childhood pre-K–3.

             (b)      Program components

                      1.     Field experiences shall involve a variety of settings, including home-
                             based, clinical or center-based, and public school-based settings.

                      2.     EPPs shall include clinical experiences where candidates are mentored by
                             qualified literacy educators and that provide candidates with literacy
                             teaching experiences with whole class, small group, one-to-one
                             instruction, and community and family-based programs.

             (c)      Specialty Area Standards

                      1.     Educator preparation programs for special education early childhood
                             shall be aligned to the CEC Initial K-12 Special Educator Standards and the
                             CEC Initial Practice-Based Professional Preparation Standards for Early
                             Interventionists/Early Childhood Special Educators (EI/ECSE).

      (6)    Special Education Hearing

             (a)      Approved programs for special education hearing lead to licensure and
                      endorsement in Special Education Hearing pre-K–12.

             (b)      Program components

                      1.      Coursework shall emphasize the application of the CEC standards in
                              instruction for students with Deaf and Hard of Hearing.

             (c)      Specialty Area Standards

                      1.     Educator preparation programs for special education hearing shall be
                             aligned to the CEC Division for Early Childhood (DEC) Initial Practice-based
                             Professional Preparation Standards for Early Interventionist/Early

Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                      Page 40 of 64
                   TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                            5.505
 PREPARATION


                             Childhood Special Educations (EI/ECSE) for grades pre-K-3 and the Initial
                             K-12 Special Educator Standards for grades 4-12.

      (7)    Special Education Interventionist

             (a)      Approved programs for special education interventionist lead to licensure and
                      endorsement in Special Education Interventionist K–8 and Special Education
                      Interventionist 6–12.

             (b)      Specialty Area Standards

                      1.     Educator preparation programs for special education interventionist shall
                             be aligned to the CEC Initial K12 Special Educator Standards.

      (8)    Special Education Vision

             (a)      Approved programs for special education vision lead to licensure and
                      endorsement in Special Education Vision pre-K–12.

             (b)      Program Components

                      1.     Coursework shall emphasize the application of the CEC standards in
                             instruction for students who are Blind and Visually Impaired.

             (c)      Specialty area standards

                      1.     Educator preparation programs for special education vision shall be
                             aligned to the CEC Division for Early Childhood (DEC) Initial Practice-based
                             Professional Preparation Standards for Early Interventionist/Early
                             Childhood Special Educations (EI/ECSE) for grades pre-K-3 and the Initial
                             K-12 Special Educator Standards for grades 4-12.

      Visual and Performing Arts

      (1)    Visual Arts Education

             (a)      Approved programs for visual arts education lead to licensure and endorsement
                      in Visual Arts K–12.

             (b)      Program Components

                      1.     Candidates shall complete a major that includes coursework from the arts
                             and sciences disciplines.

             (c)      Specialty Area Standards



Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                      Page 41 of 64
                   TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                            5.505
 PREPARATION


                      1.     Educator preparation programs for visual arts education shall be aligned
                             to the National Art Education Association's (NAEA) National Visual Arts
                             Standards.

      (2)    Music Education

             (a)      Approved programs for music education lead to licensure and endorsement in
                      Vocal/General Music K–12 or Instrumental/General Music K–12.

             (b)      Program Components

                      1.     Candidates in music education shall complete a major that includes
                             coursework from the arts and sciences disciplines.

                      2.     EPPs shall provide opportunities for candidates to develop performance
                             capabilities while participating in a variety of large and small ensembles
                             appropriate to the specific endorsement.

             (c)      Specialty Area Standards

                      1.     Educator preparation programs for music education shall be aligned with
                             the National Association of Schools of Music (NASM) Competencies.

      (3)    Theatre Education

             (a)      Approved programs for theatre education lead to licensure and endorsement in
                      Theater K–12.

             (b)      Program Components

                      1.     Candidates in theatre education shall complete a major that includes
                             coursework from the arts and sciences disciplines.

                      2.     Candidates shall have field experiences in elementary, middle, and
                             secondary grades. If it is not possible to find theatre field experiences in
                             elementary and middle grades, EPPs may substitute field experiences in
                             other performing arts areas (music and dance).

                      3.     Candidates shall complete clinical practice in both kindergarten through
                             grade eight (K–8) and in grades nine through twelve (9–12). If it is not
                             possible to find theatre clinical practice opportunities in elementary
                             grades, then the entire clinical practice may be in grades nine through
                             twelve (9–12).

             (c)      Specialty Area Standards


Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                      Page 42 of 64
                   TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                          5.505
 PREPARATION


                      1.     Educator preparation programs for theatre education shall be aligned to
                             the American Alliance for Theatre and Education (AATE) Standards for
                             Theatre Education K–12.

      (4)    Dance Education

             (a)      Approved programs for dance education lead to licensure and endorsement in
                      Dance K–12.

             (b)      Program Components

                      1.     Candidates in dance education shall complete a major that includes
                             coursework from the arts and sciences disciplines.

                      2.     Candidates shall complete clinical experiences in both kindergarten
                             through grade eight (K–8) and in grades nine through twelve (9–12). If it
                             is not possible to find dance field experiences in K-8, then the entire
                             clinical experience may be in grades nine through twelve (9–12).

             (c)      Specialty Area Standards

                      1.     Educator preparation programs for dance education shall be aligned to
                             the National Association of Schools of Dance (NASD) Competencies.

      Health and Physical Education

      (1)    Health and Wellness Education

             (a)      Approved programs for health and wellness education lead to licensure and
                      endorsement in Health and Wellness K–12.

             (b)      Program Components

                      1.     Candidates in health and wellness education shall complete a major in
                             health and wellness.

                      2.     Programs may develop dual endorsement programs in health and
                             wellness education and a second endorsement area

             (c)      Specialty Area Standards

                      1.     Educator preparation programs for health and wellness education shall
                             be aligned to the Society of Health and Physical Educators (SHAPE)
                             National Standards for Initial Health Education Teacher Education.

      (2)    Physical Education

Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                    Page 43 of 64
                    TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                            5.505
 PREPARATION


              (a)     Approved programs for physical education lead to licensure and endorsement in
                      Physical Education K–12.

                      1.      Candidates in physical education shall complete a major in physical
                              education.

              (b)     Specialty Area Standards

                      1.      Educator preparation programs for physical education shall be aligned to
                              the SHAPE National Standards for Initial Physical Education Teacher
                              Education.

      Specialists

      (1)     Library Information Specialist

              (a)     Approved programs for library information specialists lead to licensure and
                      endorsement in Library Information Specialist pre-K–12.

              (b)     Program Components

                      1.      Programs in Library Information Specialist shall lead to a graduate
                              degree. Programs may be offered at the graduate level for candidates
                              who already hold a graduate degree.

                      2.      Candidates shall complete clinical practice in school library settings in
                              both kindergarten through grade eight (K–8) and in grades nine through
                              twelve (9–12).

              (c)     Specialty Area Standards

                      1.      Educator preparation programs for library information specialists shall be
                              aligned to the American Library Association/ American Association of
                              School Librarians (ALA/AASL) Standards for Initial Preparation of School
                              Librarians.

      (2)     Reading Specialist

              (a)     Approved programs for reading specialists lead to licensure and endorsement in
                      Reading Specialist pre-K–12.

              (b)     Program Components

                      1.      Reading specialist programs shall prepare candidates at the graduate
                              level.


Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                      Page 44 of 64
                   TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                            5.505
 PREPARATION


                        2.     EPPs may only recommend candidates for the reading specialist
                               endorsement after the candidate has had at least two (2) years of
                               experience as a licensed teacher.

             (c)        Specialty Area Standards

                        1.     Educator preparation programs for reading specialists shall be aligned to
                               the International Literacy Standards.

      (3)    English as a Second Language

             (a)        Approved programs for English as a second language lead to licensure and
                        endorsement in English as a Second Language pre-K–12.

             (b)        Program components

                        1.     English as a second language programs shall be a minimum of eighteen
                               (18) hours at either the undergraduate or graduate level.

                        2.     EPPs shall ensure candidates in an English as a second language program
                               have at least six (6) semester hours of college-level world language
                               instruction or the equivalent, as determined by the EPP. These six (6)
                               hours may be counted toward the 18-hour minimum.

                        3.     EPPs shall provide candidates with instruction on the Tennessee English
                               Learner (EL) Framework.

                        4.     EPPs may offer an ESL program as an additional endorsement program
                               even if they do not offer the program for initial licensure.

             (c)        Specialty Area Standards

                        1.     Educator preparation programs for English as a Second Language shall be
                               aligned to the Teachers of English to Speakers of Other Languages
                               (TESOL) Standards for P–12 Teacher Education Programs.

      School Services

      (1)    School Counselor

             (a)        Approved programs for school counselors lead to licensure and endorsement in
                        School Counselor pre-K-12.

             (b)        Program Components


Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                      Page 45 of 64
                   TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                         5.505
 PREPARATION


                      1.     Programs in school counseling shall lead to a graduate degree. Programs
                             may be offered at the graduate level for candidates who already hold a
                             graduate degree.

                      2.     School counseling clinical experiences shall be in both kindergarten
                             through grade eight (K–8) and in grades nine through twelve (9–12).
                             Candidates shall have an opportunity to demonstrate skills in individual
                             and group counseling, teacher and parent consultation, classroom
                             guidance, building cooperative relationships in the school, leadership,
                             advocacy, and development of partnerships with community resources.

             (c)      Specialty Area Standards

                      1.     Educator preparation programs for school counselors shall be aligned to
                             the Council for Accreditation of Counseling and Related Educational
                             Programs (CACREP) Standards or the American School Counselor
                             Association (ASCA) Counselor Competencies.

      (2)    School Psychologist

             (a)      Approved programs for school psychologists lead to licensure and endorsement
                      in School Psychologist pre-K–12.

             (b)      Program Components

                      1.     Programs for school psychologists shall lead to a graduate degree.
                             Programs may be offered at the graduate level for candidates who
                             already hold a graduate degree.

                      2.     Candidates shall complete a school based clinical experience that
                             provides the candidate with a broad range of school psychological
                             experiences, including the opportunity to work with diverse client
                             populations, a range of teaching and learning styles, different types of
                             service delivery programs, and varied assessment and intervention
                             methodologies.

                      3.     Clinical practice shall be aligned to the National Association of School
                             Psychologists (NASP) Practice Model.

                      4.     Candidates shall be supervised by a licensed school psychologist during
                             all clinical experiences.

             (c)      Specialty Area Standards

Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                   Page 46 of 64
                   TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                           5.505
 PREPARATION


                      1.      Educator preparation programs for school psychology shall be aligned to
                              the National Association of School Psychologists (NASP) Standards for
                              Graduate Preparation of School Psychologists.

      (3)    School Social Worker

             (a)      Approved programs for school social workers lead to licensure and endorsement
                      in School Social Worker pre-K-12.

             (b)      Program Components

                      1.      Programs leading to licensure as a school social work may be at the
                              undergraduate or graduate level.

                      2.      Programs in school social work must be accredited by or have candidacy
                              status with the Council on Social Work Education.

             (c)      Specialty Area Standards

                      1.      Educator preparation programs for school social work shall be aligned to
                              the National Association of Social Workers (NASW) Standards for School
                              Social Work Services.

      Career and Technical Education – Academic

      (1)    Agricultural Education

             (a)      Approved programs for agricultural education lead to licensure and endorsement
                      in Agricultural Education 6–12.

             (b)      Program Components

                      1.      EPPs shall ensure candidates complete student teaching experiences in
                              successful and diverse school-based agricultural education programs.
                              EPPs should facilitate candidates securing work experiences related to
                              food, fiber, and agricultural and natural resources.

             (c)      Specialty Area Standards

                      Standard 1: Instruction

                      1.1.    Candidates demonstrate knowledge and skills in planning, integrating,
                              implementing, and evaluating safe and effective classroom and
                              laboratory instruction, supervised agricultural experience programs, and
                              related Career & Technical Student Organizations (CTSOs). They
                              demonstrate knowledge and skills in building a high-quality local program

Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                     Page 47 of 64
                  TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                          5.505
 PREPARATION


                             of agricultural education using the nationally recognized keys essential
                             for local program success.

                      1.2.   Candidates integrate core academic education standards, provide
                             program guidance to students, and develop plans that support student
                             articulation to postsecondary institutions from secondary schools. They
                             integrate related FFA student organizational activities, including
                             individual and team career development events, to enhance academic
                             attainment, leadership development, application of curriculum
                             knowledge and skills, community service, and career development. They
                             assist students in applying systems thinking and in attending to new and
                             emerging technologies.

                      Standard 2: Business, Management and Economic Systems

                      2.1.   Candidates demonstrate an understanding of the agricultural enterprise
                             system and can explain factors that impact economic changes. They apply
                             management principles to the function of agribusiness in domestic and
                             international environments and employ the concepts necessary to
                             market agribusiness goods and services successfully in a global economy.

                      2.2.   Candidates demonstrate an understanding of basic economic concepts in
                             the agricultural industry and the types of agricultural businesses in a
                             capitalist economy. They explain agribusiness operations, including
                             recordkeeping; current, appropriate technology; purchasing; sales;
                             financing; and marketing functions. They create learning experiences in
                             classroom and laboratory settings that enable students to demonstrate
                             competence in performing business tasks. Candidates model and teach
                             technical and non-technical workplace entry-level business skills needed
                             for career success.

                      2.3.   Candidates explain the impact of environmental changes on the buying
                             and selling of agribusiness goods and services. They apply cost-effective
                             procedures when designing agribusiness activities and propose solutions
                             to human resource and other agribusiness problems. Candidates
                             understand the interrelationship between the free enterprise system and
                             government policies on domestic and global production, processing, and
                             consumption in agribusiness. They assist students in understanding
                             issues and emerging technologies related to business management and
                             economic systems.


Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                    Page 48 of 64
                  TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                            5.505
 PREPARATION


                      Standard 3: Agricultural and Mechanical Systems

                      3.1.   Candidates integrate and apply practical applications in the basic use of
                             tools, equipment, and technology.

                      3.2.   Candidates demonstrate the knowledge and skills in agricultural and
                             mechanical systems which are fundamental to most areas within the
                             agricultural industry. They apply basic skills and knowledge in agricultural
                             mechanics. Candidates describe and demonstrate the use of tools,
                             equipment and facilities used in the agricultural industry. They
                             understand the theory and application of various power sources and
                             internal combustion engines. Candidates demonstrate uses of emerging
                             technologies and mechanical systems that are leading to significant
                             changes in agriculture.

                      Standard 4: Plant, Animal, Food and Fiber Systems

                      4.1.   Candidates demonstrate knowledge and skills in plant, animal, food, and
                             fiber systems by providing meaningful earning experiences for students.
                             Candidates interpret the significance of technology related to plant,
                             animal, food, and fiber systems in the world economy.

                      4.2.   Candidates apply knowledge and concepts of ecology, plant growth, and
                             plant propagation. They explain the relationships among plants, animals,
                             and soil, and their importance to the national and world economies.
                             Candidates demonstrate knowledge of plants related to the production
                             of agricultural products and assist students in understanding the
                             commercial value of plants and plant products.

                      4.3.   Candidates identify and describe uses of ornamental horticulture crops
                             and plants, materials, supplies, and structures. They demonstrate the
                             ability to plan, construct, and manage a greenhouse operation.

                      4.4.   Candidates develop prevention and control methods for diseases and
                             pests, including integrated pest management. They assess operational
                             techniques for the area of horticulture in such areas as nursery
                             production, interior and exterior landscaping, wildlife management, and
                             forestry as well as aquaculture and turf grass, where appropriate.

                      4.5.   Candidates describe distinguishing characteristics and breed
                             identification of commercial and domestic animals in Tennessee and the
                             world They assess the many uses of animal products and animal by-

Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                      Page 49 of 64
                   TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                           5.505
 PREPARATION


                             products. Candidates demonstrate knowledge of the principles of
                             commercial and domestic livestock management.

                      Standard 5: Natural Resources and Environmental Systems

                      5.1.   Candidates demonstrate knowledge of natural resources and
                             environmental systems by creating meaningful learning experiences for
                             students. They appraise the significance and the impact of technology
                             related to natural resources and environmental systems in the world
                             economy.

                      5.2.   Candidates understand and apply knowledge and concepts related to
                             soil, water, and renewable resources and evaluate and classify land for
                             agricultural, residential, recreational, and industrial uses. Candidates
                             understand and demonstrate the principles of soil, forest, and land
                             management. They examine the role of soil sample analysis in the
                             production of all plants and apply analyses to plant production.
                             Candidates explain the relationships among and the interdependence of
                             plant and animal communities in the ecosystem. Candidates understand
                             the problems confronting human, plant, and animal life as natural
                             resources and apply that understanding to principles of conservation of
                             national resources. Candidates demonstrate knowledge of relevant tools
                             and new and emerging technologies and issues.

      (2)    AgriScience Education

             (a)      Approved programs for agriscience education lead to licensure and
                      endorsement in AgriScience 6-12.

             (b)      Program Components

                      1.      EPPs shall ensure their candidates possess an extensive understanding
                              of science disciplines and knowledge that are transferable and
                              applicable across a range of general education science courses. EPPs
                              shall ensure candidates complete clinical practice experiences that are
                              in diverse, school-based agricultural education programs.

             (c)      Specialty Area Standards

                      Standard 1: Agriscience Instruction

                      1.1     Candidates demonstrate knowledge and skills in developing specific
                              academic, technical, and 21st century skills necessary to be successful in

Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                     Page 50 of 64
                   TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                         5.505
 PREPARATION


                              career and in life. They demonstrate knowledge in industry relevant
                              content through general education integration and experiences such as
                              career and technical student organizations (CTSO) and work-based
                              learning (WBL). Candidates are immersed with industry standard
                              content and technology, solve industry-based problems, meaningfully
                              interact with industry professionals and use/produce industry specific,
                              informational texts.

                      1.2     Candidates demonstrate an understanding of basic agriscience
                              concepts. Candidates will prepare students for more advanced
                              agriculture and science coursework. They will establish fundamental
                              knowledge of safety in agriculture while offering opportunities for
                              career exploration.

                      1.3     Candidates will demonstrate an overview of agricultural mechanics,
                              animal, environmental, and plant and soil sciences. Candidates will
                              identify relevant constraints and help develop solutions for each area.
                              They will explain the fundamental process of investigation-based
                              learning in connection to each area.

                      1.4    Candidates will offer a fundamental understanding of cell structures,
                             biochemistry, genetics and heredity, anatomy and physiology, and other
                             subsequent science topics in agriculture. Candidates will demonstrate
                             the key components of energy cycles and transference by exploring
                             fundamental principles of mechanical, engineering, and engine-based
                             lessons.

      (3)    Business Education

             (a)      Approved programs for business education lead to licensure and endorsement in
                      Business 6–12.

             (b)      Program Components

                      1.     The major constitutes a maximum of 30 percent of the undergraduate
                             curriculum. Course work supporting the business endorsement is taken
                             in addition to the 30 percent of the curriculum allocated to the major.

                      2.     EPPs shall enable candidates who have no related work experiences to
                             gain appropriate business workplace experiences as part of course work
                             or in a supervised practicum.

             (c)      Specialty Area Standards


Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                   Page 51 of 64
                  TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                           5.505
 PREPARATION


                      Standard 1: Business Management

                      1.1.   Candidates know and apply legal and ethical principles pertaining to
                             business.

                      1.2.   Candidates know and apply principles and methods of decision making
                             and mathematical operations leading to quantitative and qualitative
                             analysis.

                      1.3.   Candidates know and apply differentiation between ethical and legal
                             issues related to social responsibility and business management.

                      1.4.   Candidates know and apply business management functions;
                             organizational theory and development; leadership; and motivational
                             concepts.

                      Standard 2: Accounting and Finance

                      2.1.   Candidates know and apply principles and procedures for personal and
                             business financial management while completing projects that require
                             decision making skills (e.g., budgeting, saving, personal income tax,
                             investing, retirement planning, and personal banking).

                      2.2    Candidates know and apply components of the accounting cycle (e.g.,
                             analysis of source documents, procedures for journalizing and posting
                             transactions to ledgers, creating financial statements, performing
                             adjusting and closing entries) as well as uses of computerized accounting
                             packages and other financial software applications.

                      Standard 3: Marketing

                      3.1.   Candidates know and apply cultural differences in language, values, social
                             behavior, and business protocol that affect marketing strategies and
                             concepts, customer service, sales, and promotion.
                      3.2.   Candidates know and apply key marketing principles and concepts
                             including, but not limited to, customer service, selling, promotion, and
                             distribution in both domestic and international markets.

                      Standard 4: Information Technology (Computer/Information Systems)

                      4.1.   Candidates know and apply principles and procedures that relate to
                             computer applications and basic concepts of programming and systems
                             development and design in business situations.

Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                     Page 52 of 64
                  TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                           5.505
 PREPARATION


                      4.2.   Candidates know and apply terminology, principles, and procedures
                             related to the ethical use of information technology.

                      Standard 5: Economics

                      5.1.   Candidates know and apply principles of different economic systems and
                             philosophies and recognize how differences in culture, language, values,
                             and social behavior affect the ethical conduct of business across domestic
                             and international borders.

                      5.2.   Candidates know and apply basic economic principles as they relate to
                             microeconomic and macroeconomic theories and principles.

                      Standard 6: Business Environment and Communication

                      6.1.   Candidates must know and apply effective communication skills.

                      6.2.   Candidates know and apply principles of different economic systems and
                             philosophies and recognize how differences in culture, language, values
                             and social behavior affect the ethical conduct of business across domestic
                             and international borders.

                      6.3.   Candidates know and apply the principles and procedures of business
                             ownership and the unique contributions of entrepreneurs.

                      6.4.   Candidates know and apply the global business environment and an
                             understanding of the importance of business communications.

                      Standard 7: Teaching Strategies

                      7.1.   Candidates must demonstrate currency in the business technology field
                             as evidenced by appropriate industry certifications and/or course work.

                      7.2.   Teachers know and apply the legal framework that applies to career and
                             technical education.

                      Standard 8: Emerging Technologies

                      8.1.   Candidates know and apply networking concepts, systems, and business
                             models necessary to apply principles and procedures related to voice and
                             data transmission media types, and emerging technology trends.

                      8.2.   Candidates know and apply knowledge about emerging technologies,
                             including integrated microcomputer applications, Web site design, Web

Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                     Page 53 of 64
                   TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                          5.505
 PREPARATION


                             2.0, graphic design, flexible computing devices, cloud computing, and
                             multimedia applications.

                      Standard 9: Leadership

                      9.1.   Candidates know and apply knowledge about the purposes for youth
                             clubs and how youth clubs can be used to develop leadership skills in
                             students.

                      9.2.   Candidates must know and apply motivation techniques.

                      9.3.   Candidates know and apply leadership training via active learning
                             processes that promote reflection, such as discussion and dialogue,
                             writing, demonstrations, practice with feedback, and group problem
                             solving to promote a culture of leadership development.

      (4)    Computer Science Education

             (a)      Approved programs for computer science education lead to licensure and
                      endorsement in Computer Science K–12.

             (b)      Program Components

                      1.     Candidates shall complete field experiences in kindergarten through
                             grade five (K-5), grades six through eight (6-8), and grades nine through
                             twelve (9-12).

                      2.     Candidates shall complete clinical practice in both kindergarten through
                             grade eight (K–8) and in grades nine through twelve (9–12).

             (c)      Specialty Area Standards

                      1.     Educator preparation programs in computer science education shall be
                             aligned to the International Society for Technology in Education (ISTE)
                             Standards for Computer Science Education.

      (5)    Family and Consumer Sciences Education

             (a)      Approved programs for family and consumer sciences education lead to licensure
                      and endorsement in Family and Consumer Sciences 6–12. Programs may also
                      include coursework to lead to optional endorsements in Food Production and
                      Management Services 6–12 and/ or Early Childhood Care and Services 6–12.

             (b)      Program Components



Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                    Page 54 of 64
                   TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                           5.505
 PREPARATION


                      1.     Course work supporting additional endorsements in food production and
                             management services and early childhood care and services shall not
                             exceed twelve (12) semester hours for each additional endorsement.

                      2.     Candidates have field experiences in both 6-8 and 9-12 settings. While it
                             is not always possible to obtain student teaching experiences in 6-8
                             settings, at a minimum, candidates shall have practicum experiences at
                             that level.

             (c)      Specialty Area Standards for Family and Consumer Sciences

                      Standard 1: Career, Community, and Family Connections

                      1.1.   Candidates demonstrate knowledge of multiple roles and responsibilities
                             in family, work, and community settings.

                      1.2.   Candidates demonstrate responsible citizenship and service while
                             managing multiple individual, family, career, and community roles and
                             responsibilities. They understand the reciprocal impact of individual and
                             family participation in community activities. Candidates understand
                             career development concepts, the relationship between work and
                             learning, and the career planning process. They demonstrate knowledge
                             of careers and career paths in Family and Consumer Sciences. Candidates
                             use ethical reasoning processes, individually and collaboratively, to take
                             responsible action in families, workplaces, and communities.

                      Standard 2: Consumer Economics and Resource Management

                      2.1.   Candidates evaluate decisions and management practices related to
                             using human, economic, and environmental resources in a
                             technologically expanding, global economy.

                      2.2.   Candidates examine economic fundamentals and the reciprocal
                             relationships between consumer behaviors and economic factors. They
                             explain legislation that affects individuals and families and processes by
                             which public policies are developed and implemented Candidates
                             analyze the impact of consumer laws, practices, rights, and
                             responsibilities on the lives of individuals and the environment. They
                             demonstrate management of individual and family resources to provide
                             for food, clothing, shelter, health care, education, recreation,
                             transportation, child and elder care, and other family needs and wants
                             across the lifespan. Candidates use financial management processes in
                             budgeting, banking, comparative shopping, saving, investing, using

Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                     Page 55 of 64
                  TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                             5.505
 PREPARATION


                              credit, purchasing insurance, and paying taxes. They evaluate economic
                              activities in the context of rapidly changing technological and global
                              conditions.

                      Standard 3: Families in Society

                      3.1.    Candidates communicate the significance of the family and its impact on
                              the well-being of individuals and society.

                      3.2.    Candidates analyze the impact of the family as a unique, dynamic system
                              on individuals across the life span. They analyze diverse perspectives,
                              needs, and characteristics of individuals and families. Candidates
                              evaluate the interrelationships of diverse families and other institutions,
                              such as educational, governmental, religious, and occupational
                              institutions. They explain the principles and practices of family planning,
                              including responsible sexual behavior.

                      Standard 4: Human Development over the Life Span

                      4.1.    Candidates examine developmental changes of individuals across the life
                              span and factors impacting these changes.

                      4.2.    Candidates facilitate understanding of physical, social, emotional, and
                              intellectual growth and development across the life span. They explain
                              the environmental and hereditary factors that influence human growth
                              and development across the life span. Candidates evaluate changing
                              needs within the life cycle stages and their potential impact on the family
                              and the community.

                      Standard 5: Interpersonal Relations

                      5.1.    Candidates assist students in developing respectful and caring
                              interpersonal relationships in the family, school, workplace, and
                              community.

                      5.2.    Candidates analyze functions and expectations of various types of
                              relationships. They analyze the impact of personal needs and
                              characteristics on interpersonal relationships. Candidates use effective
                              conflict prevention and management principles and procedures in all
                              interpersonal relations.

                      Standard 6: Parenting



Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                      Page 56 of 64
                  TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                           5.505
 PREPARATION


                      6.1.   Candidates analyze parenting roles and responsibilities and their effects
                             on the well-being of individuals and families in a diverse society.

                      6.2.   Candidates assist students in understanding parenting and nurturing
                             practices and strategies that maximize human growth and development
                             across the life span. They recognize the impact of the critical early years
                             on optimal growth and development. Candidates understand the
                             physical, social, and emotional factors related to beginning the parenting
                             process. They demonstrate communication skills that contribute to
                             positive relationships between parents and children. Candidates evaluate
                             external support systems that provide services for parents and use
                             current and emerging research on human growth and development and
                             parenting in teaching about parenting practices.

                      Standard 7: Nutrition, Food, and Wellness

                      7.1.   Candidates demonstrate nutrition, food, and wellness practices that
                             enhance individual and family well-being.

                      7.2.   Candidates relate dietary guidelines, nutrition principles, research data,
                             and life choices to individual and family wellness. They examine the social
                             and emotional influences on personal eating habits. Candidates evaluate
                             functions and sources of nutrients as well as factors that affect food
                             quality and nutrient retention. They examine the effects of cultural
                             influences and global factors on the production, supply, and distribution
                             of food. Candidates synthesize principles of food acquisition, safety,
                             sanitation, preparation, and service to meet long-term nutrition and food
                             needs and preferences.

                      Standard 8: Textiles and Apparel

                      8.1.   Candidates integrate knowledge, skills, and practices in teaching about
                             the factors that impact textiles and apparel products.

                      8.2.   Candidates demonstrate knowledge of the factors that impact textiles
                             and apparel needs and choices of individuals and families across the life
                             span.

                      8.3.   They apply principles of art and elements of design in the selection and
                             coordination of textiles and apparel products for a variety of end uses
                             and consumer preferences. Candidates demonstrate skills needed to care
                             for, construct, and repair textiles and apparel products.


Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                     Page 57 of 64
                   TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                          5.505
 PREPARATION


                      Standard 9: Housing, Interiors, Equipment, and Furnishings

                      9.1.    Candidates integrate knowledge, skills, and practices in applying design
                              principles to the living environment and teaching about the factors
                              influencing housing decisions.

                      9.2.    Candidates analyze historical, cultural, economic, environmental, and
                              technological influences on housing, equipment, and furnishings. They
                              analyze and create blueprints and floor plans for efficiency and safety.
                              Candidates apply art and design principles in the selection of equipment
                              and furnishings to meet individual and family needs. They determine
                              benefits of regular care, periodic maintenance, and improvements of
                              housing, equipment, and interiors.

                      Standard 10: Leadership and Communication

                      10.1.   Candidates demonstrate leadership and communication skills in varying
                              family, workplace, and community contexts.

                      10.2.   Candidates demonstrate responsible leadership and service in school,
                              family, community, and work settings. They create an environment that
                              encourages and respects the ideas, perspectives, and contributions of a
                              diverse group of individuals. Candidates use good communication skills
                              and collaborative leadership and teamwork processes.

                      Standard 11: Authentic Instruction

                      11.1.   Candidates integrate core academic education standards and related
                              CTSO activities to enhance academic attainment, leadership
                              development, application of curriculum knowledge and skills, community
                              service, and career development.

                      11.2.   Candidates integrate and reinforce learning of core academic education
                              standards, such as English language arts, math, science, and social
                              studies, in family, career, and community contexts. They integrate
                              programs and projects of the Family, Career, and Community Leaders of
                              America student organization to foster student learning.

             (d)      Specialty Area Standards for Food Production and Management Services 6–12

                      Standard 1: Fundamental Skills

                      1.1.    Candidates demonstrate culinary skills and industry applications of food
                              principles.

Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                    Page 58 of 64
                   TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                           5.505
 PREPARATION


                      1.2.   Candidates demonstrate industry applications of principles of food
                             acquisition, handling, and preparation, including quantity meal planning
                             and cooking and commercial equipment operation. They demonstrate
                             culinary skills with the application of food safety and sanitation
                             procedures. Candidates demonstrate commercial preparation for all
                             menu categories to produce a variety of food products. They
                             demonstrate artistic food presentation techniques.

                      Standard 2: Food Service Management

                      2.1.   Candidates demonstrate implementation of food service management
                             functions.

                      2.2.   Candidates practice business and financial skills related to purchasing and
                             receiving in food service operations. They implement a marketing plan
                             for food service operations. Candidates examine the areas of workplace
                             ethics, legal liability, environmental issues, and human resource policies
                             within the food industry. They demonstrate the concepts of internal and
                             external customer service.

                      Standard 3: Career Development

                      3.1.   Candidates analyze career paths within the food production and food
                             services industries.

                      3.2.   Candidates have knowledge of opportunities, education and training, and
                             industry certifications for career paths in food production and services.
                             They facilitate school to work transitions and apply business and human
                             resource management skills to facilitate school-based enterprises.

             (e)      Specialty area standards for Early Childhood Care and Services 6–12

                      Standard 1: Developmentally Appropriate Practices

                      1.1.   Candidates assess and implement developmentally appropriate practices
                             that enhance growth and development of infants, toddlers, pre-
                             kindergarten children, and school-aged children.

                      1.2.   Candidates evaluate and use current and emerging research to assess
                             early childhood practices and procedures. They demonstrate knowledge
                             of child development to plan, prepare, and implement developmentally
                             appropriate practices and learning activities; select age-appropriate toys,
                             equipment, and educational materials; and observe children and
                             document observations using appropriate assessment techniques.

Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                     Page 59 of 64
                  TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                            5.505
 PREPARATION


                             Candidates implement an integrated curriculum that incorporates a
                             child's language, learning styles, home experience, and cultural values.

                      Standard 2: Understanding Content Knowledge in Early Childhood Education

                      2.1.   Candidates understand the importance of each content area—including
                             early literacy (language), math, science, social studies, creative arts,
                             music, and physical education—in young children's learning.

                      2.2.   Candidates know the essential concepts, inquiry tools, and structure of
                             content areas, including academic subjects, and can identify resources to
                             deepen their understanding. They recognize that every child constructs
                             knowledge in personally and culturally familiar ways. Candidates develop
                             curriculum that is free of biases related to ethnicity, religion, gender, or
                             ability status.

                      Standard 3: Building Meaningful Curriculum

                      3.1.   Candidates demonstrate integration of curriculum and instruction to
                             meet the developmental needs and interests of all children.

                      3.2.   Candidates demonstrate a variety of teaching methods to meet the
                             individual developmental needs of children, including children with
                             special needs.

                      3.3.   They establish schedules, routines, and transitions that complement
                             learning center activities. Candidates demonstrate knowledge of positive
                             guidance, interpersonal relations, and conflict prevention and resolution.

                      Standard 4: Health and Safety

                      4.1.   Candidates establish, organize, and maintain a safe and healthy
                             environment conducive to a child’s welfare and learning.

                      4.2.   Candidates plan nutritious meals and snacks; understand and follow
                             governmental guidelines for health, safety, and fire; recognize signs of
                             abuse and neglect and know reporting procedures; and demonstrate
                             knowledge of emergency and security procedures.

                      Standard 5: Career Development and Facilities Management

                      5.1.   Candidates analyze career paths within the child care industry and apply
                             management skills to facilitate a school- based child care program.


Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                      Page 60 of 64
                   TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                            5.505
 PREPARATION


                      5.2.   Candidates have knowledge of career opportunities, training, and
                             industry certifications for career paths in the child care industry. They
                             facilitate school to work transitions and apply business and human
                             resource management skills to operate a school-based child care
                             program. Candidates apply ethical and environmental standards as they
                             plan and implement the operational procedures for facility management.
                             They demonstrate an understanding of the interrelationship among
                             families, schools, communities, and programs.

      (6)    Marketing Education

             (a)      Approved programs for marketing education lead to licensure and endorsement
                      in Marketing Education 6–12.

             (b)      Program Components

                      1.     Candidates shall complete clinical practice in successful and diverse
                             school-based marketing education programs.

                      2.     EPPS shall provide opportunities for candidates to integrate student
                             classroom studies and CTSOs and to engage in student programs
                             employing workplace methodology.

                      3.     EPPs shall verify that candidates entering teaching directly following
                             completion of their education have had one (1) year (2,000 hours) of
                             acceptable work experience in marketing or a marketing related
                             occupation or a supervised practicum. Programs verify that candidates
                             entering teaching after working in marketing positions have had at least
                             one and one half (1 ½) years (3,000 hours) of work experience.

                      4.     EPPs that have an approved program in business education may offer the
                             additional endorsement in marketing, even if they do not have an
                             approved program in marketing education.

             (c)      Specialty Area Standards

                      Standard 1: Economics

                      1.1.   Candidates demonstrate an understanding of microeconomic and
                             macroeconomic concepts as they apply to the world’s economic systems
                             and the factors that impact economic change.

                      1.2.   Candidates apply the concepts of supply, demand, and productivity in
                             decision making. They evaluate factors affecting the availability of goods,

Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                     Page 61 of 64
                  TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                            5.505
 PREPARATION


                              services, employment, and standard of living. Candidates understand the
                              effect of the free enterprise system on domestic and global consumers as
                              well as business and government organizations. They analyze the role of
                              monetary and fiscal policy.

                      Standard 2: Business Law

                      2.1.    Candidates apply concepts of business law and ethics to business,
                              entrepreneurial, and personal services.

                      2.2.    Candidates analyze the legal rights and potential liabilities related to
                              business and marketing. Candidates evaluate the dynamic nature of law
                              in responding to the changing social, ethical, political, regulatory, and
                              international environment.

                      Standard 3: Financial Analysis

                      3.1.    Candidates apply tools, strategies, and systems used to maintain,
                              monitor, control, interpret, and plan the use of financial resources.

                      3.2.    Candidates prepare and interpret financial statements and use computer
                              systems in preparing all financial records of business organizations. They
                              explain the importance of personal and business finance and their effects
                              on the global economy. Candidates manage financial sources available to
                              make business decisions. Candidates evaluate ethical issues that impact
                              fiscal operations.

                      Standard 4: Management

                      4.1.    Candidates apply management principles to the functions of business and
                              marketing in the domestic and global marketplace.

                      4.2.    Candidates use a systems approach to design problem solving strategies
                              and evaluate models showing the flow of information in a business
                              organization. They determine information system applications
                              appropriate for each function of business. Candidates apply cost-
                              effective procedures when designing business activities and proposing
                              solutions to human relations and other business-related problems. They
                              employ pre-employment screening procedures and career management
                              techniques for new and experienced employees. Candidates integrate
                              cultural, political, and cross-cultural challenges that confront businesses
                              in a global economy.


Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                      Page 62 of 64
                  TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                            5.505
 PREPARATION


                      4.3.   Information Management. Candidates utilize tools, strategies, and
                             systems needed to access, process, maintain, evaluate, and disseminate
                             information to facilitate market research and assist business decision
                             making.

                      4.4.   Human Resources Management. Candidates apply tools, techniques, and
                             systems that businesses use to plan, staff, lead, and organize their human
                             resources.

                      4.5.   Strategic Management. Candidates employ tools, techniques, and
                             systems that affect a business’s ability to plan, control, and organize an
                             organization or department.

                      4.6.   Operations Management. Candidates demonstrate the processes and
                             systems implemented to monitor, plan, and control the day-to-day
                             activities required for continued business functioning.

                      Standard 5: Marketing

                      5.1.   Candidates apply the concepts necessary to market goods, services, and
                             ideas to compete successfully in the domestic and global economies.

                      5.2.   Candidates analyze the role of marketing in distribution, pricing, product
                             and service management, selling, promotion, and consumer behavior.

                      5.3.   Distribution. Candidates have a working knowledge of the functions of
                             the distribution process. Candidates analyze the role of distribution of
                             goods and services in domestic and global economies, including
                             transportation, warehousing, channels of distribution, supply chain
                             management, and inventory control.

                      5.4.   Pricing. Candidates have a working knowledge of the function of pricing
                             and its importance to marketing. They explain pricing policies, strategies,
                             and decisions based on an evaluation of cost, competition, and company
                             objectives. Candidates apply the concepts of return on investment, break
                             even analysis, customer perceptions, cost analysis, and target return.

                      5.5.   Product and Service Management. Candidates understand the concepts
                             and apply the processes needed to obtain, develop, brand, maintain, and
                             improve a product or service mix in response to market opportunities.
                             They provide opportunities for students to generate product ideas, use



Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                     Page 63 of 64
                  TENNESSEE STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION
 LITERACY AND SPECIALTY AREA STANDARDS FOR EDUCATOR                                        5.505
 PREPARATION


                             quality assurances, and develop product-mix strategies to contribute to
                             ongoing business success and desired business image.

                      5.6.   Selling. Candidates determine client needs and wants and respond
                             through planned, personalized communication to influence purchasing
                             decisions and enhance future business opportunities. They communicate
                             product knowledge and benefits, employ sales processes and techniques,
                             and manage sales activities to enhance customer relationships and meet
                             sales goals.

                      5.7.   Promotion. Candidates demonstrate the effective use of advertising and
                             other promotional methods to inform and persuade the consumer to
                             purchase products and services. They analyze and assess the role and
                             effectiveness of the promotional mix, including advertising, personal
                             selling, sales promotion, event marketing, public relations, and visual
                             merchandising. Candidates evaluate the management of promotional
                             activities to maximize return on promotional efforts. Candidates use
                             communication strategies to convey information about products,
                             services, images, and ideas to the target market.

                      5.8.   Consumer Behavior. Candidates understand the purchasing behaviors of
                             both consumer and industrial buyers. Candidates examine the
                             relationship between the marketing research process and decision-
                             making models. They examine cultural and international influences and
                             perceptions on consumer behavior. Candidates understand differences
                             based on market segmentation. They investigate customer service
                             strategies that satisfy the customer and take into consideration the
                             influences of culture when communicating with the customer.




Adopted: 02/08/2019
Revised: 11/21/2025                                                                  Page 64 of 64
