 #TNBestforAll




English as a Second Language
ELPA21 Transition
State Board of Education Workshop
May 30, 2024




                                    © Tennessee Department of Education
                                                                   ACADEMICS

                                                           ALL TENNESSEE STUDENTS WILL HAVE
                                                          ACCESS TO A HIGH-QUALITY EDUCATION,
         We will set all students on a path to success.       NO MATTER WHERE THEY LIVE




STUDENT READINESS                                                  E D U C AT O R S

 TENNESSEE PUBLIC SCHOOLS WILL BE                           TENNESSEE WILL SET A NEW PATH FOR
  EQUIPPED TO SERVE THE ACADEMIC                            THE EDUCATION PROFESSION AND BE
  AND NON-ACADEMIC NEEDS OF ALL                           THE TOP STATE IN WHICH TO BECOME AND
STUDENTS IN THEIR CAREER PATHWAYS                         REMAIN A TEACHER AND LEADER FOR ALL


                                                                                 © Tennessee Department of Education
Agenda

▪ Introduction of Presenters

▪ Rationale for Transition

▪ ELPA21 Implementation Plan

▪ English Learners in Tennessee

▪ ESL Rule Chapter 0520-01-19

▪ ESL Policy 3.207

▪ English Language Proficiency Assessment Shifts

▪ English Language Development Standards (ELDs)

▪ Questions



                                      © Tennessee Department of Education
Presenters




     JOANN              RAVEN               NANCY                 DR. JENNIFER
    RUNION            CLEVELAND            WILLIAMS                 JORDAN
 Senior Director of   English learner   Special Populations   Assistant Commissioner
 Student Supports      Coordinator         Coordinator        of Special Education and
    ACADEMICS          ACADEMICS           ASSESSMENT             Student Supports
                                                                      ACADEMICS




                                                               © Tennessee Department of Education
Rationale
for Transition



                 © Tennessee Department of Education
                             Contract Cycle




 Why is Tennessee            Procurement Process
transitioning from
 WIDA to ELPA21?
                             Best Meets Need
   Our needs have changed.


                             Contract

                                              © Tennessee Department of Education
Similarities and Differences between WIDA and ELPA21



      SAME
      • Four Domains
      • Required Annual Training    DIFFERENT
      • Screener
                                    • New Standards
      • Annual Assessment
                                    • No Composite Score
      • Summative Determines Exit
                                    • Alt Screener
                                    • Disability Can Exempt from Domain
                                    • Entirely Online




                                                                          © Tennessee Department of Education
                                                                                     Reporting                                                                                               Individual Student Report


ELPA21 Generates Individual                        Last, First
                                                   Student ID: 2220322251 | Student DOB: 10/20/2000 | Enrolled Grade: 4
                                                                                                                                                                  Grade 4 ELPA21 Summative 2021-2022
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Demo District 9999 name update




Student Reports (ISR)
                                                   Date Taken: 12/7/2021                                                                                                                                            Demo School 1

                                                   Overall Scale Score: 5383±227                     Comprehension Scale Score: 6034±268                               Proficiency Status: Progressing



                                                   Proficiency Determination

                                                   Proficient - Students are Proficient when they attain a level of English language skill necessary to independently produce, interpret, collaborate on, and succeed in


▪ Each Individual Student Report (ISR) contains:
                                                   grade-level content-related academic tasks in English. This is indicated on ELPA21 by attaining a profile of Level 4 or higher in all domains. Once Proficient on ELPA21,
                                                   students can be considered for reclassification.

                                                   Progressing - Students are Progressing when, with support, they approach a level of English language skill necessary to produce, interpret, and collaborate, on grade-
                                                   level content-related academic tasks in English. This is indicated on ELPA21 by attaining a profile with one or more domain scores above Level 2 that does not meet the
                                                   requirements to be Proficient. Students scoring Progressing on ELPA21 are eligible for ongoing program support.

  – Proficiency determination                      Emerging - Students are Emerging when they have not yet attained a level of English language skill necessary to produce, interpret, and collaborate on grade-level
                                                   content-related academic tasks in English. This is indicated on ELPA21 by attaining a profile of Levels 1 and 2 in all four domains. Students scoring Emerging on ELPA21
                                                   are eligible for ongoing program support.


  – Domain specific information                    How Does Your Child's Score Compare?
                                                                         Name                            Proficient%         Average Overall Scale Score                        Average Comprehension Scale Score


  – Family friendly format
                                                     Demo District 9999 name update                       0                 4418±351                                          4660±385
                                                     Demo School 1                                        0                 4418±351                                          4660±385



                                                   How Did Your Child Perform on Different Areas of the Test?

                                                                                                                           1 Beginning        2 Early Intermediate         3 Intermediate          4 Early Advanced           5 Advanced

▪ Available in seven languages
                                                          Domain                  Scale Score              Performance                                                  Domain Description
                                                                                                                                  When listening, the student at Level 5 is working on: determining the meaning of figurative language;

                                                                                                                 5
                                                                                                                                  participating in extended conversations and discussions about a variety of topics and texts, asking
                                                     Listening                       581±33                                       relevant questions and summarizing key ideas; explaining how reasons and evidence are sufficient to
                                                                                                                                  support the main ideas in a presentation.
                                                                                                                                  When reading grade-appropriate text, the student at Level 4 is working on: determining the meaning of
                                                     Reading                         581±24                      4                general academic and content‐specific words, phrases and idiomatic expressions; identifying the main
                                                                                                                                  idea or theme and explaining how it is supported by details; summarizing excerpts from a variety of
                                                                                                                                  texts; reading and interpreting information from a graph to draw conclusions.
                                                                                                                                  When speaking, the student at Level 2 is working on: participating in short conversations, responding

                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                  to simple wh‐ questions; delivering short oral presentations or describing pictures and graphs using
                                                     Speaking                        489±36                                       simple language structures; recounting a simple sequence of events in order; constructing a claim with
                                                                                                                                  one supporting reason.
                                                                                                                                  When writing, the student at Level 3 is working on: producing and expanding simple and compound

                                                                                                                 3
                                                                                                                                  sentences; composing brief narratives or informational texts, including a few details; constructing a
                                                     Writing                         512±33                                       claim about a familiar topic, introducing the topic and providing a few supporting reasons or evidence;
                                                                                                                                  asking and answering questions, responding to others’ comments, and adding own comments.



                                                     Information on Standard Error of Measurement

                                                     A student's score is best interpreted when recognizing that the student's knowledge and skills fall within a score range and not just a precise number. For example,
                                                     630 (+/-10) indicates a score range between 620 and 640.




                                                   Generated on 1/26/2023                                  Page 1 of 1                                  Copyright © 2023 Cambium Assessment, Inc. All rights reserved.

                                                                                                                                              © Tennessee Department of Education
Implementation
Plan



                 © Tennessee Department of Education
 Implementation Plan


    APR 8            MAY            JUN 1              JUL 1                FEB 5, 2025




     Title III     Standards    Portal will open    ELPA21 ELD                Annual
Directors during    Training    for on-demand      standards and            Summative
  office hours      for LEAs   screener training    assessment            English Learner
                                                   framework go            Assessment
                                                     into effect
                                                   Student screening
                                                       can begin




                                                                       © Tennessee Department of Education
TN PULSE Updates and Training Plan

    Training on the development of Individual Learning Plans (ILPs)
    in TN PULSE will take place in July 2024.



    During the training, attendees will see updates in the TN PULSE ILP
    process that are reflective of the updates in ESL Rule and ESL Policy.



    The Individual Learning Plan (ILP) Instructional Decision-Making Guide
    will also be updated to reflect the updates in ESL Rule and ESL Policy.




                                                                             © Tennessee Department of Education
English Learners in Tennessee
Landscape of Students and Educators




                                      © Tennessee Department of Education
English Learners and Educators in Tennessee

English                               English Second Language
Learners                              (ESL) Educators
▪ There are 93,433 English learners   ▪ There are a total of 7,936
  in Tennessee’s schools.               educators in TNCompass with
 ▪ ELs represent 9% of the student
                                        active licenses who hold the ESL
   population.                          endorsement.
                                       ▪ 675 educators have added an ESL
                                         endorsement through
                                         the additional endorsement
                                         pathway offered at no cost by the
                                         department.




                                                               © Tennessee Department of Education
ESL Rule 0520-01-19
Overview




                      © Tennessee Department of Education
                                           ESL Rule 0520-01-19

ESL Rule Updates

Entry and Exit Criteria


Tailoring of Direct Services


ESL Delivery and Program Models


ILP Requirements for Transitional Year 1
and Year 2 (T1-T2) Students Clarified



                                           © Tennessee Department of Education
                                                                          ESL Rule 0520-01-19

Entry and Exit Criteria
▪ The criteria for entry and exit of English as a Second Language (ESL) programs have
  been moved to ESL Policy 3.207

▪ The policy provides the qualifying scores for entry into and exit from ESL services for
  students.

▪ The policy provides information regarding the necessary qualifying scores students
  must attain to exit English learner (EL) status and start the status of Transition Year 1
  (T1).

▪ Providing the name of the assessment vendor and qualifying scores in policy allows
  the department and State Board of Education to readily update assessment
  requirements. This in turn will allow for timely updates for districts and schools.




                                                                          © Tennessee Department of Education
                                                                            ESL Rule 0520-01-19

Tailoring of Direct Services
▪ The criteria for tailoring of ESL services will be in ESL Policy 3.207.

▪ LEAs and schools may provide tailored services to students in grades 1-12 who score
  at least a level four (4) in the domains of reading, writing, and either listening or
  speaking on the summative assessment.

▪ Providing the guidance for tailoring of ESL services in policy allows the department and
  State Board of Education to readily update requirements for tailoring ESL services. This
  will allow for timely updates for districts and schools.




                                                                            © Tennessee Department of Education
                                                                      ESL Rule 0520-01-19

Delivery Model

Scheduled English Language   An ESL teacher delivers intensive language
                             instruction to English Learners during a
   Development Course        scheduled instructional period.




                             An ESL teacher delivers intensive language support
    Pull-Out Instruction     to English Learners in small groups or one-on-one
                             settings outside of the general education classroom.




                             An ESL teacher and a general content teacher
                             collaboratively plan, organize, deliver, and assess
  Co-Teaching Instruction    content and language instruction to English
                             Learners in the general content classroom.




                                                                       © Tennessee Department of Education
                                                           ESL Rule 0520-01-19

ESL Program Models


                                                  Specially Designed
  Sheltered English        Structured English
                                                 Academic Instruction
     Instruction               Immersion
                                                      in English




                Content Based
                                       Heritage Language
              English Instruction




                                                           © Tennessee Department of Education
                                                                       ESL Rule 0520-01-19
Transitional Year 1 and Year 2 (T1-T2)
Individual Learning Plans (ILPs)
▪ Requirements for the development of Transitional Year 1 and Year 2 (T1-T2)
  are revised in ESL Rule to provide clearer requirements.
▪ Districts requested a section detailing the required components for T1-T2 ILPs.
▪ For Transitional EL students, appropriate ILPs must outline services in accordance with
  transitional EL status and needs.
▪ ILPs for T1-T2 students will require the following components:
  – Relevant demographic data
  – Data from assessments, as available
  – Short term academic goals
  – Career readiness for T1-T2 grade 4-12
  – Scaffolds to access Tier I instruction




                                                                       © Tennessee Department of Education
ESL Policy 3.207
Overview




                   © Tennessee Department of Education
                                     ESL Policy 3.207

Entry and Exit Criteria
Key Terms: Modality and Domain



    Modality:          Modality:
    Productive         Receptive

      Domain:            Domain:
      Speaking           Listening

       Domain:           Domain:
        Writing          Reading



                                     © Tennessee Department of Education
                            ESL Policy 3.207

Domain Performance Levels




                            © Tennessee Department of Education
                                                        ESL Policy 3.207

Entry into ESL

         Students who score below 3 in any non-exempt
         domain (first semester K)



       Students who score below 4 in any non-exempt
       domain (second semester K to grade 12)



        Students who score below 3 in any non-exempt
        modality (Alternate ELPA screener)




                                                        © Tennessee Department of Education
                                                                                    ESL Policy 3.207

Exit Process

     EL students who score 4 or above in all non-exempt domains on the ELPA21
     Summative assessment shall be exited from Direct or Indirect ESL services.



         EL students who score 3 or above in any non-exempt modalities on the Alternate
         (Alt) ELPA21 Summative assessment shall be exited from Direct ESL Services.



         Students who exit Direct or Indirect ESL services shall be considered
         transitional EL students for four (4) school years.



     Transitional students must be monitored for the first two (2) years
     of the four (4) year transition period.




                                                                                     © Tennessee Department of Education
English Language Proficiency
Assessment Shifts



                               © Tennessee Department of Education
ELPA21 Assessments
▪ ELPA21 Dynamic Screener: Testing instrument used to identify English learners

▪ ELPA21 Summative Assessment: Annual assessment ELs take used to measure
  the specific language skills they need to interact with grade-level academic
  language courses

▪ Alt ELPA Screener: Testing instrument used to identify English learners who
  may not be able to access the ELPA Dynamic Screener due to student needs

▪ Alt ELPA Summative Assessment: Alternative screening instrument designed
  for English learners with the most significant cognitive disabilities, if
  documented in their IEP




                                                                      © Tennessee Department of Education
ELPA21
English Language Development
(ELD) Standards



                               © Tennessee Department of Education
New TN English Language Development
Standards (ELD)
▪ Only 10 ELD Standards

▪ Focus on receptive, productive, and interactive skills

▪ Take a functional approach of communication over correctness




                                                                 © Tennessee Department of Education
Clear & Concise Standards
▪ The standards are organized in relation to participation in content-area practices.
  – Standards 1 through 7 focus on the language necessary for ELs to engage in the central practices of
    learning in general content areas.
  – Standards 8 through 10 focus on linguistic features to be used in service with Standards 1-7.


▪ The ELP Standards are interrelated and can be used separately or in combination.

▪ The ELD Standards do not include curricular or instructional statements.




                                                                                    © Tennessee Department of Education
Standards 1-7
Build in order of language acquisition skills beginning with meaning and then
progressing to engagement

          Construct meaning from oral presentations and literary and informational text through
    1     grade-appropriate listening, reading, and viewing
          Participate in grade-appropriate oral and written exchanges of information, ideas, and
    2     analyses, responding to peer, audience, or reader comments and questions
          Speak and write about grade-appropriate complex literary and informational text and
    3     topics
          Construct grade-appropriate oral and written claims and support them with reasoning and
    4     evidence
          Conduct research and evaluate and communicate findings to answer questions or solve
    5     problems
    6     Analyze and critique the arguments of others orally and in writing
    7     Adapt language choices to purpose, task, and audience when speaking and writing


English Language Proficiency Assessment for the 21st Century (n.d.). ELP Standards ELPA21.
Retrieved April 19, 2024, from https://www.elpa21.org/elp-standards/
                                                                                             © Tennessee Department of Education
Standards 8-10
Examine familiar linguistic dimensions: Word/phrase, Discourse, Sentence

          Determine the meaning of words and phrases in oral presentations and literary and
    8     informational text
    9     Create clear and coherent grade-appropriate speech and text
          Make accurate use of standard English to communicate in grade-appropriate speech and
  10 writing




English Language Proficiency Assessment for the 21st Century (n.d.). ELP Standards ELPA21.
Retrieved April 19, 2024, from https://www.elpa21.org/elp-standards/
                                                                                             © Tennessee Department of Education
                      ELD Standards work with TN State Standards
                                                By the end of each English language proficiency level, an ELL can…
                         ELP.4-5.4.




GRADE 5: STANDARD 4
                                                        Level 1                    Level 2                     Level 3                 Level 4                   Level 5

                      An ELL can…               • Express an opinion        • Construct a simple       • Construct a claim      • Construct a claim      • Construct a claim
                      Construct grade-            about a familiar            claim about a              about familiar           about a variety of       about a variety of
                      appropriate oral            topic.                      familiar topic.            topics.                  topics.                  topics.
                      and written claims                                    • Give a reason to         • Introduce the topic.   • Introduce the topic.   • Introduce the topic.
                                                                              support the claim.       • Provide a few          • Provide several        • Provide logically
                      and support them
                                                                                                         reasons or facts to      reasons or facts to      ordered reasons or
                      with reasoning and
                                                                                                         support the claim.       support the claim.       facts to support the
                      evidence…                                                                                                 • Provide a                claim.
                                                                                                                                  concluding             • Provide a
                                                                                                                                  statement.               concluding
                                                                                                                                                           statement.

                                5.W.TTP.1 Write opinion pieces on topics or texts, supporting a point of view with reasons and information.
                                 A) Introduce a topic or text. B) Develop an opinion through logically-ordered reasons that are supported by
                                 facts and details. C) Create an organizational structure in which ideas are logically grouped to support the
                                 writer’s purpose. D) Provide a concluding statement or section related to the opinion presented.
                                 E) Link opinion and reasons using words, phrases, and clauses. F) Apply language standards addressed
                                 in the Foundational Literacy standards.

                                5.SL.PKI.4 Report on a topic or text, or present an opinion, sequencing ideas logically and using appropriate
                                facts and relevant, descriptive details to support main ideas.

                      English Language Proficiency Assessment for the 21st Century (n.d.). ELP Standards ELPA21.
                      Retrieved April 19, 2024, from https://www.elpa21.org/elp-standards/
                                                                                                                                                 © Tennessee Department of Education
Questions?



             © Tennessee Department of Education
Thank You!



Permission is granted to use and copy these materials for non-commercial educational purposes with attribution credit to the
“Tennessee Department of Education”. If you wish to use these materials for reasons other than non-commercial educational purposes,
please contact the Office of General Counsel at (615) 741-2921 or Joanna Collins (Joanna.Collins@tn.gov).
                                                                                                                                      © Tennessee Department of Education
