Introduction to Standards
  for the Preparation of
  Teachers of Bilingual
        Education



  Approved by the Michigan State Board of Education
                 February 14, 2017




                           1
Introduction to Standards for the Preparation of Teachers of Bilingual Education

  Conceptual Framework for the Preparation of Teachers in Michigan

  A teacher preparation program is comprised of multiple interdependent components
  that prepare candidates for certification to demonstrate proficiencies defined in
  several aligned sets of standards.

        The Michigan Interstate Teacher Assessment and Support Consortium (MI-
         InTASC) Model Core Teaching Standards, adopted by the SBE in 2013, define
         the theoretical and practical knowledge, skills, and dispositions that all entry
         level teachers should possess upon completion of an approved teacher
         preparation program.

        The Michigan Certification Standards for the Preparation of All Elementary
         and Secondary Teachers in Reading Instruction specify the expected
         knowledge and skills in the areas of reading that all teachers at the
         elementary and secondary levels should possess upon entry to the
         profession, regardless of content area specialization.

        Michigan-specific content standards define the central concepts, tools of
         inquiry, and structures of the specific discipline(s) in which teacher
         candidates seek endorsement, as well as pedagogical applications of that
         disciplinary knowledge.

  A recommendation for teacher certification is an assurance on the part of
  the teacher preparation program that a candidate demonstrates the
  appropriate proficiencies specified in each of these sets of standards.

  Standards for the Preparation of Teachers of Bilingual Education

  Purpose
  The purpose of the Standards for the Preparation of Teachers of Bilingual Education
  is to establish a shared vision for the knowledge and skills that entry level teachers
  of bilingual education in Michigan should possess and be able to demonstrate in
  their teaching, regardless of whether they follow a traditional or alternate route into
  the profession. This document provides standards across six domains of
  professional preparation to provide instruction for bilingual and multilingual
  learners. These standards establish outcomes for graduates of teacher preparation
  programs in bilingual education, and should be used to inform program
  development and continuous improvement efforts at Michigan’s institutions of
  higher education and alternate route providers. They exemplify the following
  “Beliefs for Supporting Linguistically and Culturally Diverse Learners in
  English/Multilingual Teaching,” developed and adopted by the MDE’s OFS’ English
  Learner Advisory Committee (ELAC) in its strategic planning process and revised in
  November 2016.

         We are committed to providing intensive, intentional, and appropriate
         instructional opportunities that meet the unique needs of English Learners,
         and ensuring their academic success by building on the prior knowledge,
         cultural and linguistic assets students bring to their learning communities.




                                             2
Introduction to Standards for the Preparation of Teachers of Bilingual Education

           We are committed to teacher preparation and ongoing professional learning
           that leads to effective teaching so that all students are able to make
           contributions to economic, social, civic, technological and cultural
           advancements.

           We are committed to advocating for educational equity and excellence for
           linguistically and culturally diverse learners which includes fostering climates
           that welcome, honor and respect diversity, multilingualism, multiliteracy, and
           students’ cultural contributions in a global society.

  These standards are rooted in the belief that the primary role of a Bilingual
  Education (Y_) endorsed teacher is to promote educational equity by making
  content curriculum accessible to students whose home language(s) are not English.
  The Bilingual Education (Y_) endorsed teacher serves this role by delivering content
  area instruction in the students’ home language(s) and supporting the maintenance
  and development of literacy in students’ home language(s), while simultaneously
  providing direct instruction in English language and literacy. This role is distinct
  from that of the World Language (F_) endorsed teacher, whose primary role is to
  increase students’ global competence by delivering instruction in how to speak,
  read, write and listen in a target world language that is not their home language, as
  well as by supporting students’ understanding of the world cultures associated with
  the target language. It is also distinct from that of the English as a Second
  Language (NS) endorsed teacher, whose primary role is to promote educational
  equity and the academic achievement of students whose home language(s) are not
  English by delivering instruction in how to speak, read, write, listen and
  communicate in English and by supporting their acquisition of content knowledge
  and academic language while they learn English.

  Development of the Proposal
  The ELAC, led by the MDE’s OFS and composed of representatives from Michigan’s
  local education agencies, intermediate school districts, and public and independent
  teacher preparation programs in bilingual education and ESL, began discussions
  about updating Michigan’s teacher preparation standards in November 2014. This
  action was motivated by recognition of a critical shortage of appropriately prepared
  teachers to meet the needs of Michigan’s growing population of students eligible for
  English as a second language (ESL) or bilingual education services. For example, in
  the 2015-2016 school year, 90,121 students were identified as English Learners1
  and eligible for ESL or bilingual education programs yet only 733 full-time
  equivalent instructional positions (FTEs) were devoted to serving this population by
  teachers holding NS or Y_ endorsements, according to the Registry of Educational
  Personnel for End of Year 2016. Further impetus for updating the standards came
  after the November 2015 SBE adoption of updated standards for world language
  teacher preparation. At its March 17, 2016, meeting, the consensus of the ELAC
  was to commission a targeted revision of the Bilingual Education (Y_) standards,
  and members of the ELAC were surveyed for their interest to serve on a workgroup
  engage in this work and bring an updated set of standards for ELAC approval before
  its fall 2016 meeting. The Bilingual Education Standards Workgroup met at the MDE
  on May 10, 2016, and reviewed the Standards for the Preparation of Teachers of

  1
      Source: MI School Data, 2015-2016 Student Count




                                               3
Introduction to Standards for the Preparation of Teachers of Bilingual Education

  Bilingual Education (Y_) adopted by the SBE at its July 7, 2004, meeting. It
  identified 20 standards for revision and drafted new language for the identified
  standards. The workgroup met again at the ELAC’s June 2, 2016, meeting to
  consider additional recommendations for revision made by the English as a Second
  Language Standards Workgroup, and for a third time at the MDE on August 2,
  2016, to review the standards holistically, discuss the purpose of the Bilingual
  Education (Y_) endorsement, and consider both preparation program requirements
  and endorsement authorizations, discussed later in this document.

  These standards were submitted for the SBE review at its November 15, 2016,
  meeting. This presentation was followed by a period of public comment through
  January 17, 2017. Eight comments explicitly addressing the proposed Y_ standards
  were submitted. Five commenters expressed strong support for the updated
  standards. A sixth commenter expressed confusion about the distinctions in
  purpose and role between the NS-endorsed and Y_-endorsed teacher, as described
  in this introduction and the introduction to the NS standards. Although there is
  great overlap in the pedagogical training received by ESL and bilingual teachers and
  the instructional settings in which each is prepared to teach, the core distinction
  between the two credentials is that the Y_ requires demonstration of a level of
  proficiency in a language other than English in order to facilitate the delivery of
  content in the home language of students whose first language is not English.

  Two commenters were critical of the realignment of the language proficiency
  requirements for bilingual educators, as described on the next page of this
  document. The commenters expressed concern that setting a minimum proficiency
  level of Advanced Low would not be sufficient for teachers to provide content area
  instruction in students’ home language. The Bilingual Standards Workgroup
  reviewed these concerns, but affirmed the level of Advanced Low, based upon the
  full description of individuals’ performance established by the American Council of
  Teachers of Foreign Languages (ACTFL) in its 2012 Proficiency Guidelines (see p.
  6). The Workgroup believes the Advanced Low level to be a sufficiently rigorous,
  yet achievable, expectation for bilingual teacher language proficiency to help
  alleviate the undersupply of teachers with Y_ endorsements in Michigan without
  significantly compromising on teacher quality.

  One commenter on both the Y_ and NS standards recommended that references to
  “academic vocabulary” and “language acquisition” throughout both sets of
  standards and introductory remarks be changed to “academic language” (to
  acknowledge that achieving proficiency in academic disciplines involves more than
  the mastery of discrete words) and “language development” (to acknowledge that
  language is not a commodity to be acquired, but rather a social resource that
  develops in interaction with others), respectively, to be more in line with current
  research and teaching in the field. This same commenter also recommended the
  addition of a standard “to acknowledge current research on language in different
  disciplinary and content areas that is showing how teachers can benefit from
  understanding the different discourse expectations for language in different
  subjects.” Another commenter, representing the collective feedback of the faculty
  from a Michigan educator preparation institution, recommended slight rewordings of
  selected standards (specifically, 1.4, 1.5, 2.2, 2.3 and 2.4 in both NS and Y_
  standards) for clarity. The Bilingual Standards Workgroup reviewed these




                                           4
Introduction to Standards for the Preparation of Teachers of Bilingual Education

  recommendations and endorsed updating the standards accordingly.

  These standards have strong continuity with the previous Michigan standards in
  terms of the core competencies that teachers in bilingual education programs
  should be able to demonstrate, with most of the targeted revisions consisting of
  subtle updates in language that increase the currency of the standards and provide
  stronger distinctions between expected competencies for bilingual, ESL and world
  language teachers. Standards related to teachers’ understanding of the role that
  culture plays in language development and ability to apply their understanding of
  different cultural perspectives in instruction with multilingual learners (Standards
  2.1 – 2.5) are unchanged from the 2004 standards. Outdated language referring to
  “limited-English proficient” learners was updated throughout to reference bilingual
  or multilingual learners in order to emphasize the additive value that maintenance
  and development of students’ home languages contributes to their mastery of the
  content area curriculum as well as their developing proficiency in English (e.g., 3.4,
  6.2). Standards relating to assessment (5.1 – 5.6) were updated to more clearly
  emphasize that teachers of bilingual education must be able to demonstrate
  assessment literacy not only in general, but also in the unique context of working
  with multilingual students. New standards (4.7 and 5.6) were added to further
  emphasize the need for teachers of bilingual education to be able to implement a
  variety of accommodations in both instruction and assessment that are appropriate
  to the needs of multilingual learners. A new standard (1.5) was added to support
  bilingual teachers’ ability to distinguish patterns of behavior and performance in the
  second language development process that may resemble patterns of behaviors
  exhibited by children with learning disabilities from manifestations of true learning
  disabilities.

  The most significant change in the updated standards is the level of language
  proficiency in English and the language of the bilingual endorsement that teacher
  candidates are expected to demonstrate (1.1). The 2004 standards specified a level
  of “Superior,” and teacher preparation institutions were expected to assess
  language proficiency “using a variety of testing protocols.” The new standards
  specify a level of “Advanced Low” in both English and the language of bilingual
  endorsement, the latter of which must be demonstrated using the ACTFL Oral
  Proficiency Interview (OPI), a rigorous, internationally recognized, valid and reliable
  assessment administered by Language Testing International. This performance
  standard aligns with the highest level of language proficiency required in the 2015
  Michigan Standards for the Preparation of Teachers of World Languages (F_), and
  like those standards, specifies the assessment instrument to be used to verify
  candidates’ proficiency. The consensus view of the Bilingual Standards Workgroup is
  that a significant contributing factor to the critical shortage of teachers with
  Bilingual Education (Y_) endorsements in Michigan schools (see above) is the 2004
  standards’ expectation of “Superior” proficiency in both English and the language of
  bilingual endorsement. The Workgroup recommends this re-alignment of the
  language proficiency standard, coupled with the specification of a rigorous
  assessment of oral proficiency in the language of bilingual endorsement, as a
  means to increase the supply of bilingual educators who are both native speakers of
  English and native speakers of languages other than English. It recognizes that
  while candidates may be able to achieve “Superior” proficiency in their native
  language (whether English or not), achievement of “Advanced Low” on the OPI in




                                            5
Introduction to Standards for the Preparation of Teachers of Bilingual Education

  the language of bilingual endorsement indicates that candidates are able to
  communicate “with sufficient accuracy, clarity, and precision to convey their
  intended message without misrepresentation or confusion” to the extent that
  “[t]heir speech can be understood by native speakers unaccustomed to dealing with
  non-natives, even though this may require some repetition or restatement” (ACTFL
  Proficiency Guidelines 2012, p. 6), and that this level is adequate for supporting
  students’ mastery of the content area curriculum in their home languages while
  they develop proficiency in English.

  Program Requirements
  Educator preparation institutions wishing to recommend candidates for
  endorsements in bilingual education must ensure that candidates have completed a
  program of study that includes:

        a K-12 program of study of at least 20 semester hours connected with a
         program of study of at least 30 semester hours in Elementary Education,
         Language Arts, Social Studies, Science or Mathematics for initial
         endorsement on an elementary or secondary teaching certificate. For
         programs leading to an additional endorsement on an existing teacher
         certificate containing an endorsement in one of the above content areas,
         at least 20 semester hours for a K-12 endorsement;

        demonstrated proficiency in English and the endorsed language as
         described in Standard 1.1;

        structured field experiences with a gradual release of responsibility
         (inclusive of student teaching) in three areas: elementary, middle school,
         and high school;

        course work in growth and development for early childhood and
         adolescent learners;

        preparation in instructional methods with specific strategies of instruction
         for English Learners and multilingual learners appropriate to all levels of
         certification;

        prerequisite/co-requisite: language coursework beyond the first four
         semesters of language instruction in commonly taught languages
         (inclusive of Categories I and II of the Foreign Service Institute (FSI)
         scale), as necessary to ensure achievement of proficiency standards. Any
         credits earned in language coursework may not count toward completion
         of the 20 credit minimum; and

        for initial certification, a separate professional education program of at
         least 20 semester hours appropriate to grade level of the endorsement
         sought that prepares the candidate to the appropriate learning
         progression of the Michigan Interstate Teacher Assessment and Support
         Consortium (MI-InTASC) Model Core Teaching Standards and the
         appropriate Michigan Certification Standards for the Preparation of All
         Elementary and Secondary Teachers in Reading Instruction.




                                             6
Introduction to Standards for the Preparation of Teachers of Bilingual Education

  Endorsement Authorizations
  Michigan offers Bilingual Education (Y_) endorsements in the following languages:

         Bilingual French (YA)
         Bilingual German (YB)
         Bilingual Greek (YC)
         Bilingual Russian (YE)
         Bilingual Spanish (YF)
         Bilingual Italian (YH)
         Bilingual Polish (YI)
         Bilingual Hebrew (YJ)
         Bilingual Arabic (YK)
         Bilingual Other (YL)
         Bilingual Vietnamese (YM)
         Bilingual Korean (YN)
         Bilingual Serbo/Croatian (YO)
         Bilingual Chaldean (YP)
         Bilingual Chinese (YR)
         Bilingual Filipino (YS)
         Bilingual Japanese (YT)

  Teachers possessing both a Bilingual Education (Y_) endorsement and an
  endorsement in an academic subject area may provide instruction in the subject(s)
  for which they hold specific content endorsement(s) at the level of certification,
  taught in English and the language of the bilingual endorsement. They may provide
  sheltered instruction2 in all subjects according to certificate grade level and
  Michigan Merit Curriculum (MMC) credit in core subject areas in which they are
  endorsed (e.g., a teacher with Bilingual Spanish (YF) and Social Studies (RX)
  endorsements may serve as the instructor of record for a course granting MMC
  credit in social studies offered only to students who qualify for bilingual education
  services).

  Teachers possessing a Bilingual Education (Y_) endorsement may also provide
  support for students who qualify for bilingual education services through co-
  teaching with teachers possessing appropriate certification in any subject area and
  grade level. They may also provide instruction in English as a second language and
  native language literacy, as well as lead a resource room for students who qualify
  for bilingual education services. They may serve as instructor of record for courses
  granting elective credit under the MMC without possessing additional subject area
  endorsements.




  2
    Sheltered instruction is defined as a classroom setting in which teachers use specific
  strategies to teach a specific content area (e.g., social studies or math) in ways
  comprehensible to students whose home language is not English while promoting their
  English language development.




                                                7
Introduction to Standards for the Preparation of Teachers of Bilingual Education

                       Participants in Standards Development

  Mayda Bahamonde-Gunnell, Ed.D.              Rui Niu-Cooper, Ph.D.
  Executive Director for Leadership           Associate Professor of Education
  Middle Schools/ELL/Equity and               Aquinas College
  Inclusion
  Grand Rapids Public Schools                 Marcie Pyper, Ph.D.
                                              Professor of Spanish
  Virginia David, Ph.D.                       Calvin College
  Assistant Professor, TESOL
  Western Michigan University                 Sara Rainwater
                                              ESL Coordinator
  Christina DeNicolo, Ph.D.                   Genesee Intermediate School District
  Assistant Professor,
  Bilingual/Bicultural Education              Maura Sedgeman
  Wayne State University                      Language & Literacy/SIOP Trainer
                                              Dearborn Public Schools
  Sandra Gonzales, Ed.D.
  Assistant Professor,                        Maria Elena Silva
  Bilingual Bicultural Education              English Learner Consultant
  Wayne State University                      Michigan Department of Education

  Casey L. Gordon                             Kay Smith
  Special Populations Consultant              ELL Coordinator
  Kent Intermediate School District           Grand Rapids Public Schools

  Norma Hernandez                             Shereen Tabrizi, Ph.D.
  Director, Office of English Language        Manager, Special Populations Unit
  Learners                                    Michigan Department of Education
  Detroit Public Schools
                                              Michelle Williams
  Sean Kottke, Ph.D.                          Migrant Education Consultant
  Education Consultant                        Michigan Department of Education
  Michigan Department of Education

  Sarah-Kate LaVan, Ph.D.
  Manager, Professional Preparation and
  Learning Unit
  Michigan Department of Education

  Kristina Martinez-Precious
  Principal, Marquette Elementary
  School
  Muskegon Public Schools

  Lena Montgomery
  Manager
  Wayne Regional Education Service
  Agency




                                          8
        Bilingual Education (Y_) Content Standards




Bilingual Education (Y_) Content
            Standards




                            9
                                Bilingual Education (Y_) Content Standards


No.   Guideline/Standard

      Language, Linguistics, Comparisons
1.0
      Candidates for endorsement in Bilingual Education will demonstrate:

      At least an Advanced Low level of speaking, listening, reading, and writing proficiency in at least two
      languages, English and the target non-English language, using a variety of testing protocols, including
1.1
      assessments of interpersonal, interpretive, and presentational communication, and the ACTFL Oral
      Proficiency Interview (OPI) in the target language.

      Knowledge of the linguistic elements (such as phonology, morphology, syntax, semantics, pragmatics, and
1.2
      discourse) of English and the target non-English language and their varieties.

      An understanding of language as a dynamic system and competency in helping students acquire and use
1.3   English and the target non-English language in listening, speaking, reading, and writing for social and
      academic purposes.

1.4   Knowledge of the similarities and differences between the English and the target non-English language.

      An ability to distinguish between learning challenges and behaviors associated with language acquisition
1.5
      and those associated with learning disabilities.

      An understanding of the ways language varies across subject areas and familiarity with the discursive and
1.6
      grammatical challenges of language use in different subjects.

      Cultures, Literatures, Cross-Disciplinary Concepts
2.0
      Candidates for endorsement in Bilingual Education will demonstrate:

      Knowledge, understanding, and use of the major concepts, principles, theories, and research related to the
2.1   nature and role of culture in language development and academic achievement that support student
      learning.




                                                       10
                                Bilingual Education (Y_) Content Standards


      Application of knowledge and understanding of how valuing cultural groups and students’ cultural identities
2.2
      affect language learning and school achievement.

      An understanding of the value and role of literary and cultural texts that reflect students’ heritage and
2.3   cultures and the ability to use them to interpret and reflect upon a variety of cultural perspectives over
      time.

      An understanding of similarities and differences between English-speaking and heritage cultures, and
2.4   knowledge of how to make thoughtful comparisons between them that indicate the valuing of learners’
      home cultures while enabling them to adapt to the new culture.

      An ability to identify distinctive cultural viewpoints in multiple content areas through English and the target
2.5
      non-English language.

      Second Language Development Theories and Instructional Practices
3.0
      Candidates for endorsement in Bilingual Education will demonstrate:

      An understanding of second language development theories and research, inclusive of error analysis,
3.1
      performance analysis, and interlanguage analysis.

      An ability to use language development knowledge to create a supportive classroom-learning environment
3.2   that includes opportunities for interaction and negotiation of meaning in English and the target non-English
      language.

      A variety of instructional practices that produce language outcomes through articulated program models
3.3
      that address the needs of linguistically and culturally diverse learners.

      Knowledge and utilization of a variety of strategies for instructional management that facilitate language
3.4
      development and student achievement for multilingual learners.

3.5   An ability to teach multiple content areas through English and the target non-English language.




                                                        11
                                 Bilingual Education (Y_) Content Standards


      Knowledge of individual learner variables (e.g., linguistic, cognitive, affective, social) in the second
3.6
      language development process.

      Knowledge of second language teaching methodologies and their applicability in developing instructional
3.7
      practices and resources to meet the needs of individual multilingual learners.

      Knowledge and use of a wide range of materials, resources, and technologies in effective content teaching
3.8
      for multilingual learners.

      Integration of Standards Into Curriculum and Instruction
4.0
      Candidates for endorsement in Bilingual Education will demonstrate:

      An understanding of the standards and benchmarks currently approved in Michigan for K-12 content and
4.1
      English language proficiency in curricular planning.

      An ability to integrate the standards and benchmarks currently approved in Michigan for K-12 content and
4.2   English language proficiency into instruction with appropriate strategies and techniques that support
      students in accessing the core curriculum as they learn both language and academic content.

      An ability to use standards and benchmarks to evaluate, select, design, and adapt instructional resources
4.3
      by connecting curriculum to students’ experiences and skills of home and community.

      An ability to serve as effective models of English and the target non-English language for developing
4.4
      bilingual listening, speaking, reading, and writing skills.

      An ability to plan for and teach in multi-level classrooms with learners from linguistically and culturally
4.5
      diverse backgrounds, using standards-based content curriculum.

      Familiarity with and adaptive use of a wide range of standards-based materials, resources, and
4.6
      technologies in the delivery of effective content curriculum for multilingual learners.

      Knowledge and use of differentiated instruction and appropriate and timely accommodations based on the
4.7
      needs of multilingual learners.



                                                         12
                                Bilingual Education (Y_) Content Standards


      Assessment
5.0
      Candidates for endorsement in Bilingual Education will demonstrate:

      Knowledge of the nature of assessment and multiple ways to assess that are age, level, and language
5.1
      appropriate.

      Effective and timely assessment practices including: analysis of formative, interim and summative
5.2   assessment results, and use of outcome data to inform instruction and to interpret and communicate
      student achievement results to all stakeholders.

      Knowledge of various assessment issues affecting multilingual learners (e.g., cultural and linguistic bias,
5.3
      political, social, linguistic and psychological factors).

      Knowledge of the value of assessment data for identification, placement, and demonstration of language
5.4
      proficiency and academic achievement of multilingual learners.

      Knowledge of a broad variety of assessment tools in English and the target non-English language (for
5.5   example, standards-based proficiency instruments, performance-based assessment tools, and
      standardized achievement tests of overall mastery) and how they affect multilingual learners.

      Knowledge and use of a variety of assessment accommodations appropriate to the needs of multilingual
5.6
      learners.

      Professionalism
6.0
      Candidates for endorsement in Bilingual Education will demonstrate:

6.1   Knowledge of culturally and linguistically responsive teaching practices.

      Knowledge of the additive value that multilingualism brings to the overall success of all students and an
6.2   understanding of the teacher’s role as an advocate with students, colleagues, and members of the
      community in promoting and developing multilingualism.




                                                        13
                                Bilingual Education (Y_) Content Standards


      An ability to identify, analyze, and reflect upon professional knowledge and language proficiency, and seek
6.3
      resources for improvement.

      Knowledge of legislative impact on teaching in programs for world languages, English Learners, and
6.4
      bilingual education.

6.5   Knowledge of the teacher’s role as a professional within a discipline.

      Knowledge of the history and current state of teaching world languages, English Learners, and bilingual
6.6
      students as it affects public policy and advocacy issues.

      An ability to serve as a professional resource, advocate for students, and build partnerships with students’
6.7
      families and communities.




                                                        14
