                                          MICHIGAN
                                          Departme~lEducation
  Appropriate Placement of Teachers Serving in English as a
Second Language (ESL), Sheltered English, Bilingual Education,
      Newcomer, and Dual Language Programs Guide
                                                          Table of Contents
 Introduction ............................................................................................................................................. 2
 Overview & Purpose ................................................................................................................................ 2
 Methodology for Determining Course Coding, Appropriate Placement of Teachers, and Pre-Planned
 Credit(s).................................................................................................................................................... 3
 Teacher Endorsement Considerations & Requirements ......................................................................... 4
 Appropriate Levels of Staffing.................................................................................................................. 4
 Appropriate Endorsements for Serving ELs In Michigan ......................................................................... 5
 Permits for Non-Certified and/or Endorsed Staff .................................................................................... 5
 Pathways to Certification and/or Endorsement ...................................................................................... 5
 Methodology Explained for Common EL Programs................................................................................. 7
 ELD Programs: Designated and Integrated .............................................................................................. 7
 Program Model: Newcomer Program...................................................................................................... 8
 Program Model: English as a Second Language (Push in or Pull out).................................................... 12
 Program Model: Sheltered English Instruction...................................................................................... 14
 Program Model: Dual Language Education (DLE) Program ................................................................... 17
 Closing.................................................................................................................................................... 20




                                                                                                                                                              1
Introduction
In 2024, the Michigan Department of Education (MDE) Office of Educational Supports (OES), in
collaboration with the Office of Educator Excellence (OEE), and with the support of Michigan’s English
Learner Advisory Committee, completed an extensive review and update of the Appropriate Placement
of Teachers Serving in English as a Second language (ESL), Sheltered English, Bilingual Education,
Newcomer, and Dual Language Programs Guide. This resource has been designed to support local
education agencies (LEAs) to plan, schedule, staff and implement English Language Development
programs that are compliant with federal requirements.

Overview & Purpose
Critical to student achievement and compliance with Michigan law is the appropriate preparation and
endorsement of educators assigned to teach English learners (ELs). Michigan Law (380.1233(1)) requires
that teachers of ELs be appropriately endorsed for the program type implemented by the LEA and for
the position that they hold. A certified teacher who holds an endorsement in English as a Second
Language (ESL) or Bilingual Education is permitted to serve ELs according to their endorsement grade
bands and any additional endorsement areas the teacher may hold. Teachers must demonstrate content
knowledge and hold appropriate endorsement(s) for the subject(s) for which they are the sole provider
of instruction. The guidance in this document will assist LEAs with properly placing teachers in ESL,
Bilingual, Dual Language, and Newcomer programs and co-taught courses. Either an ESL endorsement
(NS) or a Bilingual Education (YA-YT, Y_) endorsement may be utilized in each of the common program
types. In ESL, Newcomer, or Sheltered programs, both endorsement types may be leveraged. For
bilingual and dual language programs, a Bilingual Education endorsement is preferred; however, an ESL
endorsement may be used if the individual holds the corresponding world language endorsement (FA-
FS) or has passed the appropriate Oral Proficiency Interview (OPI) or similar language proficiency exam
at the required ACTFL Proficiency Guidelines.

Legal Obligations
Under Michigan’s Elliott-Larsen Civil Rights Act and federal laws, including Title VI of the Civil Rights Act
of 1964 and the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (ESEA) as amended by the Elementary and
Secondary Education Act as amended by the Every Student Succeeds Act (ESSA), state education
agencies (SEAs) and school districts have “legal obligations to ensure that EL students can participate
meaningfully and equally in educational programs and services” (Dear Colleague Letter 2015). Two
landmark court cases form the basis for the requirement for appropriately certified and endorsed
teachers to provide direct services to all ELs. In 1974, Lau v. Nichols provided requirements regarding
the education of language minority students. Justice William Douglas delivered the opinion of the court,
“Under these state-imposed standards, there is no equality of treatment merely by providing students
with the same facilities, textbooks, teachers, and curriculum; for students who do not understand English
are effectively foreclosed from any meaningful education…. We know that those who do not understand
English are certain to find their classroom experiences wholly incomprehensible and in no way
meaningful.” This case was followed by Castañeda v Pickard in 1981, which established the requirement
of the three-pronged test. “The case established a three-part test to evaluate the adequacy of a district's
program for ELL [English language learners] students:
        (1) is the program based on an educational theory recognized as sound by some experts in the
        field or is considered by experts as a legitimate experimental strategy;
        (2) are the programs and practices, including resources and personnel, reasonably calculated to
        implement this theory effectively; and
        (3) does the school district evaluate its programs and make adjustments where needed to ensure
        language barriers are actually being overcome?”

                                                                                                            2
The Office of English Language Acquisition (OELA) Toolkit Chapter 3, produced as a companion to the
(Dear Colleague Letter 2015) by the U.S. Department of Education (USED), Office for Civil Rights (OCR),
and the Department of Justice (DOJ), outlines the legal obligations for ELs, and states the following
regarding staffing an EL program:
    •   “LEA must provide the personnel necessary to effectively implement EL programs.
    •   “Necessary personnel include teachers who are qualified to provide EL services, core-content
        teachers who are highly qualified in their field, as well as, trained to support EL students, and
        trained administrators who can evaluate these teachers.
    •   “SEAs must ensure that LEAs have qualified teachers and administrators for their EL programs.”

Methodology for Determining Course Coding, Appropriate Placement of Teachers, and
Pre-Planned Credit(s)
MDE provides the following methodology to assist LEAs in creating and defining courses for students.
The methodology asks LEAs to consider four questions beginning with the standards of focus (content or
English Language Development (ELD) standards). Using that information, the LEA will determine which
course code(s) align to the standards. If the course is designed to meet the ELD needs of the student,
then the additional Course Funding Program Code of 02 – English Learner Course will be added to the
Student Course Component in the Teacher Student Data Link (TSDL). LEAs will consider what skills and
expertise are necessary for a teacher to deliver that instruction. LEAs will also consider how they are
meeting the federal and state requirements for ELs to have direct ELD instruction and full access to core
content instruction (meaningful access). Teachers who are instructing ELs will be required to have ESL or
Bilingual Education endorsements or be working toward this credential on an approved permit.
    •   Question 1 – What are the standards that will be instructed in this course?
    •   Question 2 – What is the course code that aligns to the standards instructed in the course?
    •   Question 3 – What teacher endorsements align to the skills and expertise necessary to deliver
        the standards?
    •   Question 4 – What standard(s) based; pre-planned credit(s) will students who demonstrate
        proficiency earn?

Example
This course example illustrates the methodology used by LEAs when planning courses for ELs. The four
questions are designed to walk the LEA team through the standards taught, the correlating course
codes, the appropriate certifications or endorsements needed, and the credit that the LEA plans to grant
students who demonstrate proficiency on the identified standards.

Specific scenarios aligned to the different EL Program Models are provided in the following section.
Questions 2 and 3 are not necessarily linear and will be discussed with fluidity as the LEA plans.

Course Example
Course: Sheltered ELD and 9th Grade ELA course (Integrated ELD)
 Questions                 Considerations             Answers                        Resources
 Question 1 – What are     A course can address       The standards instructed in    WIDA ELD Standards
 the standards that will   multiple areas of          this course are the WIDA       (page 178)
 be instructed in this     standards.                 ELD Standards and the
                                                                                     Michigan ELA
 course?                                              Michigan ELA State
                                                                                     Standards (starting on
                                                      Standards for 9th grade.
                                                                                     page 34)




                                                                                                            3
 Questions                  Considerations            Answers                         Resources
 Question 2 – What is       Based on the              This course will be coded as    Course SCED Codes
 the course code that       standards taught,         an ELA course with an EL
 aligns to the standards    determine the course      setting in TSDL.
 instructed in the          codes that will be        Example: SCED code 01001
 course?                    included.                 for 9th grade ELA
                                                      The EL Setting (code 02-
                                                      English learner Course)
                                                      under the Course Funding
                                                      Program Code in the
                                                      Student Course Component
                                                      will be added.
 Question 3 –What           Identify the skills and   The teacher must have the       OEE Guidance –
 teacher endorsements       expertise, and            ESL or Bilingual Education      Appropriate
 align to the skills and    corresponding             endorsement as well as the      Placement Guidelines
 expertise necessary to     endorsements using        appropriate ELA grade-level
                                                                                      Registry of
 deliver the standards?     the standards and         endorsement OR
                                                                                      Educational Personnel
                            SCED course code(s)       If the teacher does not
                                                                                      Data Field Manual
                            using the Appropriate     have the appropriate
                            Placement Guidelines.     endorsement, the LEA may
                                                      place an individual who
                                                      holds the appropriate
                                                      content knowledge for the
                                                      course under an
                                                      appropriate permit.
 Question 4 – What          Identify the credits      LEA would grant ELA 9th-        Michigan Merit
 standard(s) based; pre-    that will be awarded      grade credit.                   Curriculum law
 planned credit will        once students                                             380.1278a
 students who               demonstrate                                               380.1278b
 demonstrate                proficiency in the
 proficiency earn?          identified course.

Teacher Endorsement Considerations & Requirements
Appropriate Levels of Staffing
Students qualifying for EL services must be served by certified and appropriately endorsed teachers.
While the OCR does not provide a specific requirement in their guidance for student to teacher ratios
or the number of minutes ELs are served in EL programs, the LEA must ensure that the EL program is
effective (Castañeda v Pickard). Michigan’s EL Advisory Committee members compiled the agreements
and settlements filed between OCR and LEAs over the last 20 years. At a minimum, each agreement
settled on at least 30 minutes daily (or 150 weekly) of ELD instruction by certified ESL (NS) or Bilingual
(YA-YT, Y_) teachers for all ELs with an additional period of designated ELD for newcomers’ and those
at the lowest proficiency levels.




                                                                                                             4
Appropriate Endorsements for Serving ELs In Michigan
Teachers who provide direct ELD services to ELs in an ESL Program Model must be appropriately
certified with an endorsement in English as a Second Language (NS) or Bilingual Education (YA-YT, Y_),
matching the grade level of the students being served.
For Bilingual Education Program Models that are not co-taught, the assigned teacher providing EL
services must hold a grade level certification appropriate to the content of the course as well as a
Bilingual Education endorsement (YA-YT, Y_) or hold an ESL endorsement (NS) with either a
corresponding world language endorsement (FA-FS) or as required on the appropriate OPI or similar
language proficiency exam aligned to the ACTFL Proficiency Guidelines. The preferred credential for
Bilingual Education Program Models is the Bilingual Education endorsement.

Permits for Non-Certified and/or Endorsed Staff
A system of permits is available through the OEE to support LEAs to be in compliance with certification
and endorsement requirements while LEA staff pursue the hiring of appropriately endorsed educators
or support current staff who are seeking the appropriate endorsement through education. If the LEA
does not have any certified and endorsed staff, they must create a 4 -year plan that addresses the lack
of certified and appropriately endorsed staff. The LEA may choose to support the staff member pursuing
endorsement by offsetting tuition costs. These funds may come from Title III, Section 41, Michigan
Grow-Your-Own Grants, or other allowable sources.
If a non-certified individual or a certified teacher without an ESL endorsement (NS) or Bilingual
Education endorsement (YA-YT, Y_) is currently working with ELs as the primary instructor of EL services,
the LEA must apply for a Full Year Basic Substitute Permit for that teacher immediately and have a plan
for that teacher to earn teacher certification and/or the appropriate endorsement via a state-approved
endorsement program. Permits cost $45.00 per year (for 2024-2025) and must be renewed by the
district each year that the teacher is employed while working toward earning the endorsement for up to
a total of four years.
For additional information, visit the Teacher Permits webpage for information on how to obtain a
permit.
Alternatively, LEAs may also create a plan to recruit and hire a properly certified and endorsed teacher.
Such plans must be achieved within a reasonable amount of time (1-3 years), be in written format, and
be available upon request. LEAs must provide EL services through permitted staff during the
implementation of the plan.

Pathways to Certification and/or Endorsement
All pathways to certification and/or endorsement require successful completion of an approved
preparation program, passage of endorsement-specific state assessments, and the addition of the
endorsement to a valid teaching certificate. (OEE Resource: Adding an Endorsement to a Michigan
Teaching Certificate) See OEE’s Directory of Educator Preparation Providers and Programs for
information on approved programs for the ESL endorsement (NS) and Bilingual Education (YA-YT, Y_)
endorsements.
Traditional Route for Undergraduate Certification and Endorsement
        Graduation/completion of a state-approved teacher preparation program leading to
        certification with an ESL or Bilingual Education endorsement at an Institution of Higher
        Education (IHE).




                                                                                                            5
Alternative Route for Certification and Endorsement
       Alternative routes to teacher certification are non-traditional preparation programs designed for
       individuals who hold a minimum of a bachelor’s degree and are seeking to complete an
       expedited teacher preparation program while employed as a teacher under an Interim Teaching
       Certificate (ITC). These programs are designed to support non-certificated individuals
       transitioning into the teacher workforce, as well as certified teachers with experience working
       with ELs who seek an expedited pathway to earning an ESL endorsement (NS) or Bilingual
       Education endorsement (YA-YT, Y_). For more information on alternative routes, visit OEE’s
       Alternative Routes to Teacher Certification and Endorsement.
Master’s Degree in ESL or Bilingual Education
       Graduation/completion of a master’s degree or post-baccalaureate certification program in ESL
       or Bilingual Education from an approved Institution of Higher Education.
Master’s Degree in TESOL
       A master’s degree in TESOL does not automatically fulfill the requirement for ESL or Bilingual
       Education endorsement in Michigan. If a teacher currently holds or is seeking a master’s degree
       in TESOL, they should additionally contact a Michigan-approved educator preparation program
       to have their transcripts reviewed for endorsement. Additional coursework may be necessary to
       qualify for ESL or Bilingual Education endorsement in Michigan.
Excerpt taken from OEE Quick Reference Guide:

 Endorsement        Endorsement      Classes That Can Be Taught by Holders of Each Endorsement
                    Code


 English as a       NS                •   English Language Development (ELD) classes
 Second                               •   Sheltered instruction*3 in all subjects according to
 Language (ESL)                           certificate level
                                      •   For classes using sheltered instruction of academic
                                          content, the teacher of record must also be endorsed in
                                          the area of specialty. (e.g., If a class is coded as a sheltered
                                          social studies course, it must be taught by a teacher
                                          endorsed in both social studies and ESL).
                                      •   The ESL endorsement does not provide authorization to
                                          teach in a bilingual/dual language classroom unless the
                                          individual holds the corresponding world language
                                          endorsement (FA-FS) or has passed the appropriate OPI or
                                          similar language proficiency exam at the required level
                                          aligned to the ACTFL Proficiency Guidelines 2024.




                                                                                                             6
 Endorsement          Endorsement       Classes That Can Be Taught by Holders of Each Endorsement
                      Code


 Bilingual           YA-YT, Y_           •   Subjects for which the teacher holds primary
 Education                                   certification/endorsement at the level of certification
                                         •   Subjects are taught in English and the language of the
                                             Bilingual Education endorsement (Bilingual Education
                                             Program or Dual Language Program).
                                         •   ESL courses at the grade level of endorsement
                                         •   Sheltered instruction*3 in all subjects using English or the
                                             language of the Bilingual Education endorsement
                                         •   Sheltered courses (taught in English or the identified non-
                                             English language) in the areas of specialty endorsement
                                             (e.g., If a class is coded as a sheltered social studies course,
                                             it would be taught by a teacher endorsed in both social
                                             studies and Bilingual Education)

*3 In sheltered instruction, teachers use specific strategies to teach a specific content area (e.g., social
studies or math) in ways comprehensible to the students while promoting their language development.

Methodology Explained for Common EL Programs
ELD Programs: Designated and Integrated
English Language Development (ELD) refers to the intentional instruction of English (listening, speaking,
reading and writing) for students that are English learners. The terms designated and integrated ELD are
described in the chart and are used throughout the following program descriptions. A combination of
Designated ELD and Integrated ELD is used to fulfill the required minutes of EL services each week. In
addition, LEAs must ensure students have meaningful access to all courses. Additional specificity on the
required duration of ELD by proficiency level will be released in Spring 2025.

     Topics                    Designated ELD                                 Integrated ELD

 Description      Designated ELD is language acquisition        Integrated ELD is language instruction
                  instruction provided to students during       that embeds the ELD standards into
                  identified times, separate from content       general education course content or
                  instruction. This type of model is often      subject areas.
                  delivered through small group
                  instruction or an ELD course. Designated
                  ELD is required for proficiency levels
                  1.0-1.9.


 Standards        The teacher is responsible for the WIDA       The teacher is responsible for both the
 and              ELD standards                                 WIDA ELD standards and content
 Resources                                                      standards in one course.
                  Often leverages specific ELD curriculum
                  that is Tier I instruction aligned.           Incorporates WIDA ELD standards into
                                                                the content area curriculum.



                                                                                                                7
    Topics                    Designated ELD                              Integrated ELD

 Teacher         Teachers must have an ESL/Bilingual Ed       Two teachers: One content endorsed,
                 Endorsement or be on an appropriate          and one ESL or Bilingual Education
                 permit (Full Year Basic for the ESL NS or    endorsed.
                 Bilingual YA-YT, Y_).                        One teacher: Content teacher with ESL
                                                              or Bilingual Education endorsement.

 Michigan        09 ESL                                       05 Dual Language
 Student         13 Newcomer (ELD)                            07 Transitional Bilingual
 Data System                                                  10 Sheltered Instruction
 (MSDS)                                                       13 Newcomer (sheltered)
 Language
 Model
 Codes


Program Model: Newcomer Program
Description: The National Clearinghouse of English Language Acquisition [NCELA] describes Newcomer
Programs in their publication on Programs for Newcomer Students:

   “Students who arrive in the United States from other countries (newcomers) represent a variety of
   educational and linguistic backgrounds. States and LEAs need to be prepared to meet the academic
   and social-emotional needs of these students. Newcomer students from different countries speak a
   variety of languages and have different levels of literacy skills and educational backgrounds. They
   may have specific needs based on their personal histories and family circumstances, but they
   generally share various academic and language challenges when arriving in the United States. Some
   districts [LEAs] establish dedicated newcomer programs to meet the needs of students who are new
   to the United States. These newcomers are important assets to the global economy and will make a
   valuable contribution to the nation's social and economic vitality. Moreover, these students will help
   expand the knowledge that native English speakers have of other cultures and countries.

   “Newcomer programs are as diverse as the students they serve. In districts where the number of
   newcomers is small, newcomer programs may consist of classes within existing elementary, middle,
   or high schools, which students can attend for part of the day while attending general education
   classes with their non-EL peers for the remainder of the day. Other newcomer programs are large,
   with as many as 400 students or more, and are housed at separate site locations. The International
   High Schools network is an example of this type of program (see Schools & Academies on the
   Internationals Network website).

   “The following goals of newcomer programs in secondary schools have been articulated by Short &
   Boyson (2012):
    •   “Helping newly arrived students develop beginning English language skills.
    •   “Delivering appropriate content area instruction.
    •   “Assisting students to acclimate to the U.S. school system.
    •   “Building or strengthening students’ native language skills.”

Appropriate Teacher Placement: Teachers in newcomer programs must hold a teaching certificate valid
for the grade in which they are placed, ESL or Bilingual Education (YA-YT, Y_) endorsement.

                                                                                                        8
        Scenario 1: Elementary Newcomer program placement. Students arriving from abroad are
        beginning learners of English. These students are grouped into a multiage classroom (K-3 or 3-5),
        and the focus of their day is learning English through scaffolded grade-level-appropriate
        content.

        Scenario 2: Newcomer Secondary program placement. Students who are arriving from abroad
        are beginning learners of English. These students are grouped into a multiage classroom (6-8 or
        9-12), and the focus of their day is learning English through scaffolded grade-level appropriate
        content.

        Scenario 3: Newcomer Secondary Course placement. A newcomer course is held for 1-2 class
        periods and combines integrated ELD and any content standards into the instruction. In this
        scenario, there is a Newcomer course that is double-blocked at the high school that combines
        designated ELD, integrated ELD, and US History.

        Scenario 4: Newcomer Secondary ELD Course placement. A newcomer course held for one or
        more class periods that is solely focused on teaching English. In this scenario, the entire focus of
        the course is ELD.

Course Example: Newcomer Scenario 1
Elementary Newcomer Program (multiage K-3) (Integrated ELD)
A teacher who is appropriately placed in this program could have a K-8 Self-contained Certification with
an ESL or Bilingual Education endorsement.
 Questions                           Answers                             Resources
 Question 1 – What are the           WIDA ELD Standards and              WIDA ELD Standards (Page 25)
 standards that will be instructed   elementary content subject
                                                                         ELA Standards
 in this course?                     standards
 Question 2 – What is the course     Grades K-3 (Create multiple         SCED Finder
 code that aligns to the             courses with one teacher)
 standards instructed in the         Grade K 23003
 course?                             Grade 1 23004
                                     Grade 2 23005
                                     Grade 3 23006
                                     The EL Setting (code 02- English
                                     learner Course) under the
                                     Course Funding Program Code
                                     in the Student Course
                                     Component will be added.
 Question 3 –What teacher            The teacher will have the ESL or    OEE Guidance – Courses That
 endorsements align to the skills    Bilingual Education                 Can Be Taught
 and expertise necessary to          Endorsement as well as the
                                                                         OEE Guidance- Self-contained
 deliver the standards?              appropriate grade band
                                                                         flexibility
                                     endorsement.
                                                                         Registry of Educational
                                                                         Personnel Data Field Manual
 Question 4 – What standard(s)       Not Applicable (N/A)                Not Applicable (N/A)
 based; pre-planned credit will
 students who demonstrate
 proficiency earn?


                                                                                                           9
Course Example: Newcomer Scenario 2
Secondary, Self-Contained Newcomer Program (vs. Course, see below) (Integrated ELD)
A teacher who is appropriately placed in this self-contained, multi-hour program (more than just a
double block) is a certified teacher who holds any endorsement at the grades they are serving with an
ESL or Bilingual Education endorsement.
 Questions                           Answers                             Resources
 Question 1 – What are the           WIDA ELD Standards and              6-8 WIDA ELD Standards
 standards that will be instructed   identified additional content       9-12 WIDA ELD Standards
 in this course?                     standards to be taught in the
                                     content areas.                      ELA Standards
                                                                         Math Standards
                                                                         Science Standards
                                                                         Social Studies Standards
 Question 2 – What is the course     Miscellaneous Other SCED code       Course SCED Codes
 code that aligns to the             – 22999. Secondary, Self-
 standards instructed in the         Contained Newcomer programs
 course?                             do not have a designated SCED
                                     code. The LEA will choose
                                     22999, Miscellaneous.
                                     The EL Setting (code 02- English
                                     learner Course) under the
                                     Course Funding Program Code in
                                     the Student Course Component
                                     will be added.
 Question 3 –What teacher            The teacher will have the ESL or    OEE Guidance – Appropriate
 endorsements align to the skills    Bilingual Education                 Placement Guidance
 and expertise necessary to          Endorsement as well as any
                                                                         OEE Guidance- Self-contained
 deliver the standards?              required secondary certification.
                                                                         flexibility
                                                                         Registry of Educational
                                                                         Personnel Data Field Manual
 Question 4 – What standard(s)       Elective credit (for the ELD        N/A
 based; pre-planned credit will      standards) + course content
 students who demonstrate            credit for the standards that
 proficiency earn?                   were instructed.
                                     Given the uniqueness of this
                                     program type, the content credit
                                     awarded will vary by
                                     demonstration of proficiency.




                                                                                                        10
Course Example: Newcomer Scenario 3
Secondary Newcomer Course (vs. Program, see above) (Integrated ELD)
A teacher that is appropriately placed in this program is a certified teacher who holds the endorsement
that is appropriate to the content being taught with an ESL or Bilingual Education endorsement.
 Questions                           Answers                            Resources
 Question 1 – What are the           WIDA ELD Standards and the         6-8 WIDA ELD Standards
 standards that will be instructed   Michigan Social Studies            9-12 WIDA ELD Standards
 in this course?                     standards (ex. Double Blocked
                                                                        Michigan K-12 Social Studies
                                     US History course for
                                                                        Standards
                                     Newcomers)
 Question 2 – What is the course     04101 – US History                 Course SCED Codes
 code that aligns to the             Comprehensive
 standards instructed in the
                                     The EL Setting (code 02- English
 course?
                                     learner Course) under the
                                     Course Funding Program Code
                                     in the Student Course
                                     Component will be added.
 Question 3 –What teacher            The teacher will have the ESL or   OEE Guidance – Appropriate
 endorsements align to the skills    Bilingual Education                Placement Guidelines
 and expertise necessary to          Endorsement as well as an
                                                                        OEE Guidance- Self-contained
 deliver the standards?              appropriate social studies
                                                                        flexibility
                                     grade-level endorsement.
                                                                        Registry of Educational
                                                                        Personnel Data Field Manual
 Question 4 – What standard(s)       US History credit                  N/A
 based, pre-planned credit will
 students who demonstrate
 proficiency earn?

Course Example: Newcomer Scenario 4
Secondary Newcomer Course (Designated ELD)
A teacher that is appropriately placed in this program is a certified teacher who holds the endorsement
that is appropriate to the content being taught with an ESL or Bilingual Education endorsement.
 Questions                           Answers                            Resources
 Question 1 – What are the           WIDA ELD Standards and the         6-8 WIDA ELD Standards
 standards that will be instructed   Michigan ELA State standards       9-12 WIDA ELD Standards
 in this course?
 Question 2 – What is the course     01008 English as a Second          Course SCED Codes
 code that aligns to the             Language
 standards instructed in the
                                     The EL Setting (code 02- English
 course?
                                     learner Course) under the
                                     Course Funding Program Code
                                     in the Student Course
                                     Component will be added.
 Question 3 –What teacher            The teacher will have the ESL or   OEE Guidance – Appropriate
 endorsements align to the skills    Bilingual Education                Placement Guidelines
 and expertise necessary to          Endorsement as well as an
                                                                        OEE Guidance- Self-contained
 deliver the standards?
                                                                        flexibility

                                                                                                       11
 Questions                           Answers                               Resources
                                     appropriate social studies
                                                                           Registry of Educational
                                     grade-level endorsement.
                                                                           Personnel Data Field Manual
 Question 4 – What standard(s)       Elective credit for ELD               N/A
 based; pre-planned credit will
 students who demonstrate
 proficiency earn?

Program Model: English as a Second Language (Push in or Pull out)
Description: An ESL Program Model uses a variety of techniques, strategies, methodology, and special
curriculum designed to teach EL students English language skills, which may include listening, speaking,
reading, writing, study skills, comprehension, content vocabulary, and cultural orientation. ESL
instruction is primarily taught in English with translation used to support meaning.

Appropriate Teacher Placement: Teachers in ESL programs should hold a teaching certificate. In
addition, the teacher must hold an ESL or Bilingual Education (YA-YT, Y_) endorsement that is valid for
the grade in which they are placed.

        Scenario 1: An elementary student is placed in a general education 1st-grade class, and an
        appropriately certified and ESL or Bilingual education endorsed teacher pulls the student out of
        their classroom to provide direct designated ELD instruction in ESL designed to teach the
        language of English. The ESL teacher’s endorsement must cover the grades taught. The
        classroom teacher should be trained in appropriate methodologies for delivering content
        instruction that is accessible/comprehensible to students learning English (meaningful access).

        Scenario 2: A secondary student is placed in non-sheltered 9th-grade courses with a SIOP trained
        teacher. The general education teachers are responsible for instructing the content in an
        accessible/comprehensible manner, and an appropriately certified ESL or Bilingual Education
        endorsed teacher pulls the student out of their content courses for direct ELD instruction with a
        frequency and duration that is needed to support the student in learning academic English and
        meets the minimum requirements. Additional specificity on the required duration of ELD by
        proficiency level will be released in Spring 2025.

        Scenario 3: A secondary student is placed in an ESL course that runs for one or two blocks every
        day. All the students in the class are English Learners, and the focus of the course is to provide
        designated ELD and teach the English language (not English Language Arts). The focal standards
        of this course are the WIDA ELD Standards. An appropriately certified ESL or Bilingual Education
        endorsed teacher will have one of these endorsements that is valid in the grade band being
        instructed. The initial certification is not relevant to this course. For example, if a teacher has an
        elementary certificate with aK-12 ESL endorsement, they would be appropriately placed in this
        course because they are using their expertise as a K-12 ESL teacher.




                                                                                                            12
Course Example: ESL Scenario 1 (Grade 1)
Elementary, ESL Push In or Pull Out (Designated ELD)
A teacher who is appropriately placed in this program is a certified teacher who has an ESL or Bilingual
Education endorsement with an endorsement or certification for the grades they are serving.
 Questions                           Answers                            Resources
 Question 1 – What are the           WIDA ELD Standards                 WIDA ELD Standards (Page 25)
 standards that will be instructed   It is possible for additional
                                                                        ELA Standards (Used to support
 in this course?                     standards to be taught in the
                                                                        the instruction in the General
                                     content areas.
                                                                        Education classroom)
 Question 2 – What is the course     No SCED Code – The teacher is      Course SCED Codes
 code that aligns to the             not the teacher of record
 standards instructed in the
                                     Services are provided by pulling
 course?
                                     or pushing into other content
                                     areas
 Question 3 –What teacher            The teacher will have the ESL or   OEE Guidance – Appropriate
 endorsements align to the skills    Bilingual Education                Placement Guidelines
 and expertise necessary to          Endorsement as well as an
                                                                        Registry of Educational
 deliver the standards?              elementary endorsement
                                                                        Personnel Data Field Manual
                                     and/or certification.
 Question 4 – What standard(s)       N/A                                N/A
 based; pre-planned credit will
 students who demonstrate
 proficiency earn?


Course Example: ESL Scenario 2 (Grade 9)
Secondary, Push in Pull Out (Designated ELD)
A teacher who is appropriately placed in this program is a certified teacher who has an ESL or Bilingual
Education endorsement and holds an endorsement or certification for the grades they are serving.
 Questions                           Answers                            Resources
 Question 1 – What are the           ELD, EL services, or Co-teaching   9-12 WIDA ELD Standards
 standards that will be instructed   WIDA ELD Standards
                                                                        ELA Standards (Used to support
 in this course?                     It is possible for additional
                                                                        the instruction happening in the
                                     standards to be taught in the
                                                                        General Education classroom)
                                     content areas.
 Question 2 – What is the course     No SCED Code – The teacher is      Course SCED Codes
 code that aligns to the             not the teacher of record.
 standards instructed in the
                                     Services are provided by pulling
 course?
                                     or pushing into other content
                                     areas
 Question 3 –What teacher            The teacher will have the ESL or   OEE Guidance – Appropriate
 endorsements align to the skills    Bilingual Education                Placement Guidelines
 and expertise necessary to          Endorsement.
                                                                        Registry of Educational
 deliver the standards?
                                                                        Personnel Data Field Manual




                                                                                                           13
 Questions                           Answers                             Resources
 Question 4 – What standard(s)       N/A                                 N/A
 based; pre-planned credit will
 students who demonstrate
 proficiency earn?
Course Example: ESL Scenario 3 (Secondary)
Secondary ESL Course (Designated ELD)
A teacher who is appropriately placed in this program is a certified teacher, has an ESL or Bilingual
Education endorsement, and who holds an endorsement that is valid for the appropriate grade band (for
example, K-12), accompanied by a teacher certificate in any grade band.
 Questions                           Answers                             Resources
 Question 1 – What are the           WIDA ELD Standards                  9-12 WIDA ELD Standards
 standards that will be instructed   It is possible for additional
 in this course?                     standards to be taught in the
                                     content areas.
 Question 2 – What is the course     01992 ELD                           Course SCED Codes
 code that aligns to the
 standards instructed in the
 course?
 Question 3 –What teacher            The teacher will have the ESL or    OEE Guidance – Appropriate
 endorsements align to the skills    Bilingual Education                 Placement Guidance
 and expertise necessary to          Endorsement as well as an
                                                                         Registry of Educational
 deliver the standards?              elementary or secondary
                                                                         Personnel Data Field Manual
                                     certification
 Question 4 – What standard(s)       Elective credit                     N/A
 based; pre-planned credit will
 students who demonstrate
 proficiency earn?

Program Model: Sheltered English Instruction
Description: A Sheltered English Instruction Program uses instructional approaches designed to make
academic instruction in English understandable to EL students. In a sheltered classroom, teachers
incorporate strategies such as physical activities, visual aids, and the environment to teach vocabulary
and academic content in mathematics, science, social studies, and other subjects. There is a dual,
simultaneous focus on learning the WIDA ELD standards while learning the identified content standards.

Appropriate Teacher Placement: Teachers in Sheltered English programs must hold a teaching
certificate that is valid for the grade/content in which they are placed. In addition, the teacher must hold
an ESL or Bilingual Education (YA-YT, Y_) endorsement.

        Scenario 1: An elementary student is placed in a grade-level classroom where the instruction is
        designed for students learning English. Every lesson delivered is carefully planned for language
        access and the integrated ELD along with the content being presented. Sheltered teachers are
        appropriately certified with the self-contained endorsement for the grade taught and endorsed
        for their content, hold the ESL or Bilingual Education endorsement, and are the teacher of
        record for the student. Teachers in these programs readily use the SIOP methodologies to make
        the learning comprehensible and to develop the student’s proficiency in English.

        Scenario 2: A secondary student is placed in a Sheltered ELA course in 9th grade. The teacher is
        appropriately endorsed with a 9-12 ELA endorsement as well as an ESL or Bilingual Education
                                                                                                         14
endorsement. The course is designed to meet the needs of students learning English and covers
the grade-level ELA content standards.

NON-EXAMPLE: A secondary student is placed in a Sheltered ELA course in 9th grade. The
teacher is appropriately endorsed with a 9-12 ELA endorsement and is trained in SIOP. The
course is designed to support meaningful access, to meet the needs of students learning English,
and to provide instruction in the grade-level ELA content standards. This course does not
qualify as part of the ELD instruction required by the Language Assistance Program (LAP). To
qualify as a sheltered course and meet the compliance requirements of the LAP, the teacher
must also have the ESL or Bilingual Education endorsement and provide integrated ELD.




                                                                                             15
                                                                                                   ■
Course Example: Sheltered Instruction Scenario 1
Elementary, Sheltered Instruction (Integrated ELD)
A teacher who is appropriately placed in this sheltered instruction program is a certified teacher who
holds an endorsement for the grades they are serving with an ESL or Bilingual Education endorsement.
 Questions                           Answers                            Resources
 Question 1 – What are the           WIDA ELD Standards                 ELD Standards (Page 61)
 standards that will be instructed   The elementary content             ELA Standards
 in this course?                     standards for the content area     Math Standards
                                     that will be addressed.            Science Standards
                                                                        Social Studies Standards
 Question 2 – What is the course     Self-Contained Grade Level         Course SCED Codes
 code that aligns to the
                                     The EL Setting (code 02- English
 standards instructed in the
                                     learner Course) under the
 course?
                                     Course Funding Program Code
                                     in the Student Course
                                     Component will be added.
 Question 3 –What teacher            The teacher will have the ESL or   OEE Guidance – Appropriate
 endorsements align to the skills    Bilingual Education                placement Guidelines
 and expertise necessary to          Endorsement as well as
                                                                        Registry of Educational
 deliver the standards?              elementary certification
                                                                        Personnel Data Field Manual
 Question 4 – What standard(s)       N/A                                N/A
 based; pre-planned credit will
 students who demonstrate
 proficiency earn?

Course Example: Sheltered Instruction Scenario 2
Secondary, Sheltered Instruction – 9th grade ELA (Integrated ELD)
A teacher that is appropriately placed in this sheltered instruction program is a certified teacher who
holds an endorsement in the grades and content they are serving and has an ESL or Bilingual Education
endorsement.
 Questions                           Answers                            Resources
 Question 1 – What are the           WIDA ELD Standards                 9-12 WIDA ELD Standards
 standards that will be instructed   ELA Michigan
                                                                        ELA Standards
 in this course?
 Question 2 – What is the course     01001 – 9th grade ELA              Course SCED Codes
 code that aligns to the
                                     The EL Setting (code 02- English
 standards instructed in the
                                     learner Course) under the
 course?
                                     Course Funding Program Code
                                     in the Student Course
                                     Component will be added.
 Question 3 –What teacher            The teacher will have the ESL or   Appropriate Placement
 endorsements align to the skills    Bilingual Education                Guidelines
 and expertise necessary to          Endorsement as well as an ELA
                                                                        Registry of Educational
 deliver the standards?              endorsement and secondary
                                                                        Personnel Data Field Manual
                                     certification



                                                                                                         16
 Questions                          Answers                            Resources
 Question 4 – What standard(s)      ELA Credit                         The content credit awarded will
 based; pre-planned credit will     ELD Elective Credit                vary by demonstration of
 students who demonstrate                                              proficiency.
 proficiency earn?

Program Model: Dual Language Education (DLE) Program
Description: In Dual Language Education Programs, also known as two-way, one-way, or developmental
Bilingual Education Programs, the goal is for students to develop language proficiency in two languages
by receiving instruction in English and another language in a classroom that is often comprised of half
native English speakers and half native speakers of the other language. DLE programs may be 50/50 with
instruction in each target language is divided equally, or 90/10, 80/20, etc. with instruction gradually
shifts from the non-English target language to English.

There are two main program types in DLE programs.

        Two Way – A two-way dual language program is based on the premise that two groups of
        students (each with different home languages, in the United States, one being English) learn
        together in a systematic way so that both groups become bilingual and biliterate in the two
        languages. (Source: IDRA.org)

        One Way – A one-way dual language program is a program that serves a single group of
        students with the same language to learn both English and the other language with the goal of
        becoming bilingual and biliterate.

Note: This guidance is designed to support LEAs in maintaining compliance and best practices for
English Learners. If your dual language program does not include English learners, the following
guidance does not apply.

Appropriate Teacher Placement: Teachers in the DLE program should hold the Bilingual Education
endorsement for the non-English language being taught. If the teacher does not have the Bilingual
Education endorsement, the ESL endorsement can be considered if the individual holds the
corresponding world language endorsement (FA-FS) or has passed the appropriate OPI or similar
language proficiency exam at the required level aligned to the ACTFL Proficiency Guidelines 2024.

        Scenario 1: In an elementary 50/50 DLE model where students move between two teachers,
        one that teaches in English and another that teaches in the target language, at least one of the
        teachers (preferably the teacher teaching English) should have the appropriate grade level self-
        contained endorsement as well as the Bilingual Education endorsement (preferred) or the ESL
        endorsement with required language proficiency. This model can also be staffed by a single
        teacher teaching in both languages, but in this model, the teacher is required to hold the
        Bilingual Education endorsement or the ESL endorsement with required language proficiency.

        Scenario 2: In an elementary 90/10 or 80/20 DLE model where students are served by their
        single teacher all day, all teachers serving should have the Bilingual Education endorsement
        (preferred) or the ESL endorsement with required language proficiency. As students progress in
        their grades and their percentages become more balanced, if students begin to be taught by
        two teachers daily, at least one of them must hold a Bilingual Education or ESL endorsement.
        The example is provided for a 50/50 Grade 2 DLE classroom.



                                                                                                       17
       Scenario 3: In a secondary 50/50 DLE program, students have half of their courses per day in
       English and half of their courses in the target language. The student's course load must include
       at least one of the teachers must have the Bilingual Education Endorsement (preferred) or ESL
       endorsement with required language proficiency. The example is provided for a 50/50 Grade 9
       DLE program.

Course Example: DLE Scenario 1 50/50 Model (Grade 2)
Elementary, Dual Language Education Program (Integrated ELD)
A teacher who is appropriately placed in this DLE model holds the Bilingual Education endorsement for
the non-English language being taught. If the teacher does not have the Bilingual Education
endorsement, the ESL endorsement can be considered if the individual holds the corresponding world
language endorsement (FA-FS) or has passed the appropriate OPI or similar language proficiency exam
at the required level aligned to the ACTFL Proficiency Guidelines 2024.
 Questions                           Answers                             Resources
 Question 1 – What are the           WIDA ELD Standards:                 WIDA ELD Standards (Page 83)
 standards that will be instructed   The elementary content
                                                                         ELA Standards/SLA* Standards
 in this course?                     standards for the content area
                                                                         (Spanish language)
                                     that will be addressed.
                                                                         Math Standards
                                                                         Science Standards
                                                                         Social Studies Standards
 Question 2 – What is the course     Self-Contained Grade Level          Course SCED Codes
 code that aligns to the
                                     The EL Setting (code 02- English
 standards instructed in the
                                     learner Course) under the Course
 course?
                                     Funding Program Code in the
                                     Student Course Component will
                                     be added.
 Question 3 –What teacher            The teacher will have the ESL or    OEE Guidance – Appropriate
 endorsements align to the skills    Bilingual Education Endorsement     Placement Guidelines
 and expertise necessary to          OR an ESL endorsement with an
                                                                         Registry of Educational
 deliver the standards?              elementary Self-Contained
                                                                         Personnel Data Field Manual
                                     certification
 Question 4 – What standard(s)       N/A                                 N/A
 based; pre-planned credit will
 students who demonstrate
 proficiency earn?
Course Example: DLE Scenario 2 90/10 Model (Grade 2)
Elementary, Dual Language Education Program (Integrated ELD)
A teacher who is appropriately placed in this DLE model holds the Bilingual Education endorsement for
the non-English language being taught. If the teacher does not have the Bilingual Education
endorsement, the ESL endorsement can be considered if the individual holds the corresponding world
language endorsement (FA-FS) or has passed the appropriate OPI or similar language proficiency exam
at the required level aligned to the ACTFL Proficiency Guidelines 2024.
 Questions                           Answers                            Resources
 Question 1 – What are the           WIDA ELD Standards                 Grade 2-3 WIDA ELD Standards
 standards that will be instructed   The elementary content
                                                                        ELA Standards/ SLA Standards
 in this course?                     standards for the content area
                                                                        (if the non-English Language is
                                     that will be addressed.
                                                                        Spanish)
                                                                        Math Standards

                                                                                                          18
 Questions                           Answers                            Resources
                                                                        Science Standards
                                                                        Social Studies Standards
 Question 2 – What is the course     Self-Contained Grade Level         Course SCED Codes
 code that aligns to the
                                     The EL Setting (code 02- English
 standards instructed in the
                                     learner Course) under the
 course?
                                     Course Funding Program Code
                                     in the Student Course
                                     Component will be added.
 Question 3 –What teacher            The teacher will have the ESL or   Appropriate Placement
 endorsements align to the skills    Bilingual Education                Guidelines
 and expertise necessary to          Endorsement OR an ESL
 deliver the standards?              endorsement with an                Registry of Educational
                                     elementary Self-Contained          Personnel Data Field Manual
                                     certification
 Question 4 – What standard(s)       N/A                                N/A
 based; pre-planned credit will
 students who demonstrate
 proficiency earn?

Course Example: DLE Scenario 3 50/50 Model (Grade 9)
Secondary, Dual Language Education Program (Integrated ELD)
A teacher that is appropriately placed in this DLE model holds the Bilingual Education endorsement for
the non-English language being taught and the appropriate secondary certificate with relevant content
endorsements for the assignment (for example, secondary math for a 9th-grade math teacher). If the
teacher does not have the Bilingual Education endorsement, the ESL endorsement can be considered if
the individual holds the corresponding world language endorsement (FA-FS) or has passed the
appropriate OPI or similar language proficiency exam at the required level aligned to the ACTFL
Proficiency Guidelines 2024.
 Questions                           Answers                            Resources
 Question 1 – What are the           WIDA ELD Standards                 9-12 WIDA ELD Standards
 standards that will be instructed   The secondary content
                                                                        ELA Grade 9 Standards (It is
 in this course?                     standards for the content area
                                                                        used to support the instruction
                                     that will be addressed as with
                                                                        happening in the General
                                     ELA Grade 9.
                                                                        Education classroom.)
 Question 2 – What is the course     SCED Code for the relevant         Course SCED Codes
 code that aligns to the             content such as 01001 for 9th
 standards instructed in the         grade ELA.
 course?
                                     The EL Setting (code 02- English
                                     learner Course) under the
                                     Course Funding Program Code
                                     in the Student Course
                                     Component will be added.
 Question 3 –What teacher            The teacher will have the ESL or   OEE Guidance – Appropriate
 endorsements align to the skills    Bilingual Education                Placement Guidelines
 and expertise necessary to          Endorsement as well as
                                                                        Registry of Educational
 deliver the standards?              secondary certification with an
                                                                        Personnel Data Field Manual
                                     ELA ( or other relevant content)
                                     endorsement.
                                                                                                          19
 Questions                          Answers                             Resources
 Question 4 – What standard(s)      ELA Credit                          N/A
 based; pre-planned credit will
 students who demonstrate
 proficiency earn?

Closing
The updated "Appropriate Placement of Teachers Serving in English as a Second Language (ESL),
Sheltered English, Bilingual Education, Newcomer, and Dual Language Programs Guide" represents a
significant step forward in supporting ELs in Michigan. By providing clear, actionable guidance for LEAs
on planning, staffing, and implementing ELD programs, the guide ensures compliance with federal and
state requirements while promoting the academic success of EL students.
This framework benefits EL students in Michigan by ensuring they are taught by highly qualified,
appropriately endorsed educators who are equipped to meet their unique linguistic and academic
needs. With access to programs designed to remove language barriers, EL students are empowered to
engage meaningfully in their education, achieve their full potential, and build the skills necessary for
lifelong success.
Additionally, the guide strengthens LEAs by offering pathways for educator certification, supporting
professional growth, and ensuring schools have the resources and tools to meet the unique needs of
their students. By prioritizing access, and excellence, Michigan reaffirms its commitment to creating
educational environments where all students can thrive, contributing to stronger communities and a
brighter future for English learners across the state. If questions arise, contact MDE-OES at MDE-
EL@Michian.gov.




                                                                                                           20
