    Standards for the
Preparation of Teachers of
   English as a Second
        Language


   Approved by the Michigan State Board of Education
                  February 14, 2017

               Updated October 1, 2024
Standards for the Preparation of Teachers of English as a Second Language

Table of Contents
Introduction ............................................................................................. 3
  Conceptual Framework for the Preparation of Teachers in Michigan ................... 3
  Standards for the Preparation of Teachers of English as a Second Language ....... 3
     Purpose ................................................................................................ 3
     Development of the Proposal ................................................................... 4
     Program Requirements (Fall 2017-Winter 2024) ......................................... 6
     Endorsement Authorizations .................................................................... 7
     Fall 2024 Update ................................................................................... 8
     Program Requirements ........................................................................... 8
     Endorsement Authorizations .................................................................... 8
     Implementation Supports and Resources ................................................... 9
  Participants in Standards Development ...................................................... 10
English as a Second Language (NS) Content Standards ........................... 11
  Standard 1: Language, Linguistics, Comparisons ......................................... 12
  Standard 2: Cultures, Literatures, Cross-Disciplinary Concepts ....................... 12
  Standard 3: Second Language Development Theories and Instructional Practices
  ........................................................................................................... 13
  Standard 4: Integration of Standards Into Curriculum and Instruction ............. 14
  Standard 5: Assessment .......................................................................... 14
  Standard 6: Professionalism ..................................................................... 15




                                                                                                              2
Standards for the Preparation of Teachers of English as a Second Language

                                   Introduction

Conceptual Framework for the Preparation of Teachers in Michigan

A teacher preparation program is comprised of multiple interdependent components
that prepare candidates for certification to demonstrate proficiencies defined in
several aligned sets of standards.

   •   The Michigan Interstate Teacher Assessment and Support Consortium (MI-
       InTASC) Model Core Teaching Standards, adopted by the SBE in 2013, define
       the theoretical and practical knowledge, skills, and dispositions that all entry
       level teachers should possess upon completion of an approved teacher
       preparation program.

   •   The Michigan Certification Standards for the Preparation of All Elementary
       and Secondary Teachers in Reading Instruction specify the expected
       knowledge and skills in the areas of reading that all teachers at the
       elementary and secondary levels should possess upon entry to the
       profession, regardless of content area specialization.

   •   Michigan-specific content standards define the central concepts, tools of
       inquiry, and structures of the specific discipline(s) in which teacher
       candidates seek endorsement, as well as pedagogical applications of that
       disciplinary knowledge.

A recommendation for teacher certification is an assurance on the part of
the teacher preparation program that a candidate demonstrates the
appropriate proficiencies specified in each of these sets of standards.

Standards for the Preparation of Teachers of English as a Second Language

Purpose
The purpose of the Standards for the Preparation of Teachers of English as a
Second Language (ESL) is to establish a shared vision for the knowledge and skills
that entry level teachers of ESL in Michigan should possess and be able to
demonstrate in their teaching, regardless of whether they follow a traditional or
alternate route into the profession. This document provides standards across six
domains of professional preparation to provide instruction for English Learners.
These standards establish outcomes for graduates of teacher preparation programs
in ESL and should be used to inform program development and continuous
improvement efforts at Michigan’s institutions of higher education and alternate
route providers. They exemplify the following “Beliefs for Supporting Linguistically
and Culturally Diverse Learners in English/Multilingual Teaching,” developed and
adopted by the MDE’s OFS’ English Learner Advisory Committee (ELAC) in its
strategic planning process and revised in November 2016.

       We are committed to providing intensive, intentional, and appropriate
       instructional opportunities that meet the unique needs of English Learners
       and ensuring their academic success by building on the prior knowledge,
       cultural and linguistic assets students bring to their learning communities.



                                                                                      3
Standards for the Preparation of Teachers of English as a Second Language

         We are committed to teacher preparation and ongoing professional learning
         that leads to effective teaching so that all students are able to make
         contributions to economic, social, civic, technological and cultural
         advancements.

         We are committed to advocating for educational equity and excellence for
         linguistically and culturally diverse learners which includes fostering climates
         that welcome, honor and respect diversity, multilingualism, multiliteracy, and
         students’ cultural contributions in a global society.

These standards are rooted in the belief that the primary role of an English as a
Second Language (NS) endorsed teacher is to promote educational equity and the
academic achievement of students whose home languages are not English by
delivering instruction in how to speak, read, write, listen and communicate in
English and by supporting their acquisition of content knowledge and academic
language while they learn English. This role is distinct from that of the World
Language (F_) endorsed teacher, whose primary role is to increase children’s global
competence by delivering instruction in how to speak, read, write and listen in a
target world language that is not their home language, as well as by supporting
students’ understanding of the world cultures associated with the target language.
It is also distinct from that of the Bilingual Education (Y_) endorsed teacher, whose
primary role is to promote educational equity by making content curriculum
accessible to students whose home languages are not English by delivering content
area instruction in the students’ home language(s), supporting the maintenance
and development of literacy in students’ home language(s), and simultaneously
providing direct instruction in English language and literacy.

These standards are aligned with the TESOL/CAEP Standards of the Recognition of
Initial TESOL Programs in P-12 ESL Teacher Education (2010). Because they are
aligned with the same standards used by national accrediting bodies and specialty
program associations for recognition and accreditation decisions, Michigan
programs’ alignment to the state standards will support their accreditation
activities.

Development of the Proposal
The ELAC, led by the MDE’s OFS and composed of representatives from Michigan’s
local education agencies, intermediate school districts, and public and independent
teacher preparation programs in bilingual education and ESL, began discussions
about updating Michigan’s teacher preparation standards in November 2014. This
action was motivated by recognition of a critical shortage of appropriately prepared
teachers to meet the needs of Michigan’s growing population of students eligible for
ESL or bilingual education services. For example, in the 2015-2016 school year,
90,121 students were identified as English Learners1 and eligible for ESL or bilingual
education programs yet only 733 full-time equivalent instructional positions (FTEs)
were devoted to serving this population by teachers holding NS or Y_
endorsements, according to the Registry of Educational Personnel for End of Year
2016. Further impetus for updating the standards came after the November 2015
SBE adoption of updated standards for world language teacher preparation. At its

1
    Source: MI School Data, 2015-2016 Student Count


                                                                                        4
Standards for the Preparation of Teachers of English as a Second Language

March 17, 2016, meeting, the consensus of the ELAC was to review the
TESOL/CAEP 2010 standards and Michigan’s Standards for the Preparation of
Teachers of English as a Second Language (NS) adopted by the SBE at its July 7,
2004, meeting to determine whether an adoption of the TESOL/CAEP standards or a
targeted revision of the English as a Second Language (NS) standards would be the
best approach to updating Michigan’s standards. Members of the ELAC were
surveyed for their interest to serve on a workgroup engage in this work and bring
an updated set of standards for ELAC approval before its fall 2016 meeting. The
ESL Standards Workgroup met at the MDE on May 10, 2016, and determined that a
targeted revision of the 2004 NS standards was the best approach for updating
Michigan standards. It identified 19 standards for revision and drafted new
language for the identified standards. The workgroup met again at the ELAC’s June
2, 2016, meeting to review recommended revisions from the May meeting and
reach consensus on draft language for standards that were not considered during
the May meeting. The workgroup met for a third time at the MDE on August 3,
2016, to review the standards holistically, discuss the purpose of the English as a
Second Language (NS) endorsement, and consider both preparation program
requirements and endorsement authorizations, discussed later in this document.

These standards were submitted for the SBE review at its November 15, 2016,
meeting. This presentation was followed by a period of public comment through
January 17, 2017. Seven comments explicitly addressing the proposed NS
standards were submitted, and all were strongly supportive of the standards. One
commenter recommended that Program Requirements be amended to require non-
native English speakers pursuing the NS endorsement to “prove that they had
taken a certain number of college credits in English.” Because teacher preparation
coursework for the NS endorsement is taught in English and teacher licensure
assessments are administered in English, the demonstration of English proficiency
represented by “successful completion of coursework in an approved program and
required assessments for teacher licensure” in Standard 1.1 was considered
sufficient by the ESL Standards Workgroup for addressing this concern, and no
changes to the standards or program requirements were made as a result of this
feedback.

A second commenter on both the NS and Y_ standards recommended that
references to “academic vocabulary” and “language acquisition” throughout both
sets of standards and introductory remarks be changed to “academic language” (to
acknowledge that achieving proficiency in academic disciplines involves more than
the mastery of discrete words) and “language development” (to acknowledge that
language is not a commodity to be acquired, but rather a social resource that
develops in interaction with others), respectively, to be more in line with current
research and teaching in the field. This same commenter also recommended the
addition of a standard “to acknowledge current research on language in different
disciplinary and content areas that is showing how teachers can benefit from
understanding the different discourse expectations for language in different
subjects.” A third commenter, representing the collective feedback of the faculty
from a Michigan educator preparation institution, recommended slight rewordings of
selected standards (specifically, 1.4, 1.5, 2.2, 2.3 and 2.4 in both NS and Y_
standards) for clarity. The ESL Standards Workgroup reviewed these
recommendations and endorsed updating the standards accordingly. These


                                                                                 5
Standards for the Preparation of Teachers of English as a Second Language

standards have strong continuity with the previous Michigan standards in terms of
the core competencies that teachers in ESL programs should be able to
demonstrate, with most of the targeted revisions consisting of subtle updates in
language that increase the currency of the standards and provide stronger
distinctions between expected competencies for ESL, bilingual and world language
teachers. Standards related to teachers’ understanding of the role that culture plays
in language development and ability to apply their understanding of different
cultural perspectives in instruction with English Learners (Standards 2.1 – 2.4) are
unchanged from the 2004 standards. Outdated language referring to “limited-
English proficient” learners was updated throughout to reference English Learners
to align with the language adopted in the Every Student Succeeds Act (e.g., 3.7,
6.4). Standards relating to assessment (5.1 – 5.6) were updated to more clearly
emphasize that teachers of ESL must be able to demonstrate assessment literacy
not only in general, but also in the unique context of working with English Learners
in an ESL setting. New standards (4.6 and 5.7) were added to further emphasize
the need for teachers of ESL to be able to implement a variety of accommodations
in both instruction and assessment that are appropriate to the needs of English
Learners. Lastly, a new standard (1.5) was added to support bilingual teachers’
ability to distinguish patterns of behavior and performance in the second language
development process that may resemble patterns of behaviors exhibited by children
with learning disabilities from manifestations of true learning disabilities. The most
significant change in the updated standards is the expectation for language
proficiency in English that teacher candidates are to demonstrate (1.1). The 2004
standards specified “At least a superior level of speaking, listening, reading, and
writing proficiency in English using a variety of testing protocols.” The new
Standard 1.1 specifies that candidates demonstrate “an ability to serve as effective
models of spoken and written English as demonstrated by successful completion of
coursework in an approved program and required assessments for teacher
licensure.” The rewritten standard aligns with the performance indicator for
exceeding TESOL/CAEP’s corresponding standard. As teacher preparation programs
in ESL are delivered in English and multiple certification testing requirements for
earning an NS endorsement (e.g. Professional Readiness Exam, Michigan Test for
Teacher Certification #086) assess candidates’ reading and writing skills at a high
level, the consensus view of the ESL Standards Workgroup is that reifying
additional formal testing of candidates’ English proficiency within the standards was
not warranted.

Program Requirements (Fall 2017-Winter 2024)
Educator preparation institutions wishing to recommend candidates for
endorsements in world languages must ensure that candidates have completed a
program of study that includes:

   •   an elementary or secondary program of study of at least 20 semester
       hours, or K-12 program of study of at least 24 semester hours connected
       with a program of study of at least 30 semester hours in Elementary
       Education, Language Arts, Social Studies, Science or Mathematics for
       initial endorsement on an elementary or secondary teaching certificate.
       For programs leading to an additional endorsement on an existing teacher
       certificate, at least 20 semester hours for an elementary or secondary
       endorsement and 24 semester hours for a K-12 endorsement;


                                                                                    6
Standards for the Preparation of Teachers of English as a Second Language

    •   Prerequisite/co-requisite: documented experience learning a second
        language equivalent to two semesters’ worth of college-level study in
        order to gain an understanding and appreciation of the processes of
        learning an additional language. Any semester hours earned in language
        coursework in fulfillment of this requirement may not count toward the 20
        semester hour minor or 24 semester hour group minor; and

    •   for initial certification, a separate professional education program of at
        least 20 semester hours appropriate to grade level of the endorsement
        sought that prepares the candidate to the appropriate learning
        progression of the Michigan Interstate Teacher Assessment and Support
        Consortium (MI-InTASC) Model Core Teaching Standards and the
        appropriate Michigan Certification Standards for the Preparation of All
        Elementary and Secondary Teachers in Reading Instruction.

In addition K-12 initial and additional endorsement programs must provide:

    •   structured field experiences with a gradual release of responsibility
        (inclusive of student teaching) in three areas: elementary, middle school,
        and high school;

    •   course work in growth and development for early childhood and
        adolescent learners; and

    •   preparation in instructional methods with specific strategies of instruction
        for English Learners and multilingual learners appropriate to all levels of
        certification.

Endorsement Authorizations
Teachers possessing an English as a Second Language (NS) endorsement may
provide instruction in an ESL classroom in the grade levels indicated on their
certificate for the NS endorsement. Teachers possessing an English as a Second
Language (NS) endorsement and an endorsement in a core subject area may
provide sheltered instruction2 in all subjects according to certificate grade level and
Michigan Merit Curriculum (MMC) credit in core subject areas in which they are
endorsed (e.g., a teacher with English as a Second Language (NS) and Social
Studies (RX) endorsements with 6-12 grade level authorizations may serve as the
instructor of record for a course granting MMC credit in social studies offered only
to students in grades 6-12 who qualify for ESL services).

Teachers possessing an English as a Second Language (NS) endorsement may also
provide support for students who qualify for ESL services through co-teaching with
teachers possessing appropriate certification in any subject area and in any grade
level within the span of the NS endorsement. They may also provide instruction in a
resource room setting for students who qualify for ESL services and may serve as
instructor of record for courses granting elective credit under the MMC without

2
  Sheltered instruction is defined as a classroom setting in which teachers use specific
strategies to teach a specific content area (e.g., social studies or math) in ways
comprehensible to students whose home language is not English while promoting their
English language development.


                                                                                           7
Standards for the Preparation of Teachers of English as a Second Language

possessing additional subject area endorsements. The NS endorsement is not
authorization to teach in a bilingual classroom in Michigan.

Fall 2024 Update
In alignment with Michigan’s revised teacher certification structure, the NS
endorsement is only available with a PK-12 grade band, effective June 30, 2024.
Grade bands of K-8, 6-12, and K-12 have been phased out. The following updated
program requirements and implementation supports and resources provide further
guidance to educator preparation providers (EPP) approved to offer PK-12 NS
endorsement.

EPPs wishing to recommend candidates for the PK-12 NS endorsement must ensure
that candidates have completed a program of study that includes:
       • Course work in growth and development as related to dual language
          learners’ literacy development for early childhood through adolescent
          phase
       • Preparation in instructional methods with specific strategies of instruction
          for multilingual learners appropriate for early childhood, early
          adolescence, and adolescence.
Program Requirements
       • For currently certified teachers seeking an additional endorsement, an
          approved program of study aligned to the NS teacher preparation
          standards.
       • For currently certified teachers seeking an additional endorsement, an
          approved program of study aligned to the NS teacher preparation
          standards.
Prerequisite/co-requisite: documented experience1 learning a second language
equivalent to two semesters’ worth of college-level study in order to gain an
understanding and appreciation of the processes of learning an additional language.

Endorsement Authorizations
Teachers possessing an English as a Second Language (NS) endorsement may
provide instruction in an ESL classroom in the grade levels indicated on their
certificate for the NS endorsement. Teachers possessing an English as a Second
Language (NS) endorsement and an endorsement in a core subject area may
provide sheltered2 instruction in all subjects according to certificate grade level and
Michigan Merit Curriculum (MMC) credit in core subject areas in which they are
endorsed (e.g., a teacher with English as a Second Language (NS) and Social
Studies (RQ) endorsements with 5-9 or 7-12 grade level authorizations may serve
as the instructor of record for a course granting MMC credit in social studies offered
to multilingual learners in grades 5-9 or 7-12 who qualify for ESL services).
Teachers possessing an English as a Second Language (NS) endorsement may also
provide support for students who qualify for ESL services through co-teaching with
teachers possessing appropriate endorsement in any subject area and in any grade
level within the span of the NS endorsement. They may also provide instruction in a
resource room setting for multilingual learners who qualify for ESL services and
may serve as instructor of record for courses granting elective credit under the
MMC without possessing additional subject area endorsements. The NS
endorsement is not an authorization to teach in a bilingual classroom in Michigan.



                                                                                      8
Standards for the Preparation of Teachers of English as a Second Language


Implementation Supports and Resources
  • Glossary of terms encountered in the NS standards and/or current evidence-
     based teaching and assessment practices.
  • NS Standards aligned projects, assessments, and relevant resources offered
     by committee members for EPP faculty’s perusal.




                                                                             9
Introduction to Standards for the Preparation of Teachers of English as a Second Language



                            Participants in Standards Development

       Martha A. Adler, Ph.D.                     Maria Selena Protacio, Ph.D.
       Associate Professor,                       Assistant Professor of Literacy Studies
       Reading/Language Arts & ESL                Western Michigan University
       University of Michigan-Dearborn
                                                  Marcie Pyper, Ph.D.
       Elizabeth Corah-Hopkins, Ph.D.             Professor of Spanish
       Program Coordinator,                       Calvin College
       Bilingual/Bicultural Education
       Wayne State University                     Sara Rainwater
                                                  ESL Coordinator
       Christina DeNicolo, Ph.D.                  Genesee Intermediate School District
       Assistant Professor of Bilingual and
       Bicultural Education                       Maura Sedgeman
       Wayne State University                     Language & Literacy/SIOP Trainer
                                                  Dearborn Public Schools
       Casey L. Gordon
       Special Populations Consultant             Kerry Segel, Ph.D.
       Kent Intermediate School District          Professor of English
                                                  Saginaw Valley State University
       Norma Hernandez
       Director, Office of English Language       Maria Elena Silva
       Learners                                   English Learner Consultant
       Detroit Public Schools                     Michigan Department of Education

       Sean Kottke, Ph.D.                         Kay Smith
       Education Consultant                       ELL Coordinator
       Michigan Department of Education           Grand Rapids Public Schools

       Sarah-Kate LaVan, Ph.D.                    Shereen Tabrizi, Ph.D.
       Manager, Professional Preparation and      Manager, Special Populations Unit
       Learning Unit                              Michigan Department of Education
       Michigan Department of Education
                                                  Suzanne Toohey, M.Ed.
       Su McKeithen-Polish, Ph.D.                 ESL/Title III Consultant
       Bilingual Education/Title III Consultant   Oakland Schools
       Macomb Intermediate School District
                                                  Michelle Williams
       Lena Montgomery                            Migrant Education Consultant
       Manager                                    Michigan Department of Education
       Wayne Regional Education Service
       Agency

       Rui Niu-Cooper, Ph.D.
       Associate Professor of Education
       Aquinas College




                                                                                       10
English as a Second Language (NS)
        Content Standards




                                    11
                              English as a Second Language (NS) Content Standards



                                  Standard 1: Language, Linguistics, Comparisons

Candidates for endorsement in English as a Second Language will demonstrate:

1.1   An ability to serve as effective models of spoken and written English as demonstrated by successful completion of
coursework in an approved program and required assessments for teacher licensure.

1.2   Knowledge of the linguistic elements (such as phonology, morphology, syntax, semantics, pragmatics, and discourse)
of English and their role in developing literacy.

1.3   An understanding of the dynamic changing nature of language systems.

1.4    Knowledge of socio-linguistic elements such as language varieties, dialects, registers, and the value of
bilingualism/multilingualism.

1.5   An ability to distinguish between learning challenges and behaviors associated with language development and those
associated with learning disabilities.

1.6  An understanding of the ways language varies across subject areas and familiarity with the discursive and
grammatical challenges of language use in different subjects.

                          Standard 2: Cultures, Literatures, Cross-Disciplinary Concepts

Candidates for endorsement in English as a Second Language will demonstrate:

2.1   Knowledge, understanding, and use of the major concepts, principles, theories, and research related to the nature
and role of culture in language development and academic achievement that support students learning.

2.2   Application of knowledge and understanding of how valuing cultural groups and students’ cultural identities affect
language learning and school achievement.

2.3   An understanding of the value and role of literary and cultural texts that reflect students’ heritage and cultures and
the ability to use them to interpret and reflect upon a variety of cultural perspectives over time.




                                                                                                                        12
                               English as a Second Language (NS) Content Standards



2.4   An understanding of similarities and differences between English-speaking and heritage cultures, and knowledge of
how to make thoughtful comparisons between them that indicate the valuing of learners’ home cultures while enabling them
to adapt to the new culture.

                Standard 3: Second Language Development Theories and Instructional Practices

Candidates for endorsement in English as a Second Language will demonstrate:

3.1   An understanding of second language development theories and research, inclusive of error analysis, performance
analysis, and interlanguage analysis.

3.2    An ability to use language development knowledge to create a supportive classroom-learning environment that
includes opportunities for interaction and negotiation of meaning in English.

3.3   A variety of instructional practices that produce language outcomes through articulated program models that address
the needs of linguistically and culturally diverse learners.

3.4   Knowledge and use of second language development theories and research in classroom organization, developing
teaching strategies, and choosing and adapting classroom instructional resources.

3.5   Knowledge of individual learner variables (e.g., linguistic, cognitive, affective, social) in the second language
development process.

3.6   Knowledge of second language teaching methodologies and their applicability in developing instructional practices
and resources to meet the needs of individual English Learners.

3.7   Knowledge and use of a variety of strategies to promote full participation of English Learners in classrooms.

3.8   Knowledge and use of a wide range of materials, resources, and technologies in effective content teaching for English
Learners.

3.9    Competency in teaching English Learners to acquire and use English in listening, speaking, reading, and writing for
social and academic purposes.




                                                                                                                          13
                              English as a Second Language (NS) Content Standards



                     Standard 4: Integration of Standards Into Curriculum and Instruction

Candidates for endorsement in English as a Second Language will demonstrate:

4.1   An understanding of the standards and benchmarks currently approved in Michigan for K-12 content and English
language proficiency in curricular planning.

4.2    An ability to integrate the standards and benchmarks currently approved in Michigan for K-12 content and English
language proficiency into instruction with appropriate strategies and techniques that support students in accessing the core
curriculum as they learn both language and academic content.

4.3   An ability to use standards and benchmarks to evaluate, select, design, and adapt instructional resources by
connecting curriculum to students’ experiences and skills of home and community.

4.4   An ability to manage and implement standards-based content instruction to support English Learners in accessing the
core curriculum as they learn language and academic content.

4.5  Knowledge, understanding, and use of standards-based practices and strategies related to planning, implementing,
and managing content instruction including the use of critical thinking skills for English Learners.

4.6    Familiarity with and adaptive use of a wide range of standards-based materials, resources, and technologies in the
delivery of effective content curriculum for English learners.

4.7   Knowledge and use of differentiated instruction and appropriate and timely accommodations based on the needs of
the needs of English Learners.

                                               Standard 5: Assessment

Candidates for endorsement in English as a Second Language will demonstrate:

5.1   Knowledge of the nature of assessment and multiple ways to assess that are age, level, and language appropriate.

5.2    Effective and timely assessment practices including: analysis of formative, interim and summative assessment
results, and use of outcome data to inform instruction and to interpret and communicate student achievement results to all
stakeholders.



                                                                                                                      14
                               English as a Second Language (NS) Content Standards



5.3    Knowledge of various assessment issues affecting English Learners (e.g., cultural and linguistic bias, political, social,
linguistic and psychological factors).

5.4    Knowledge and use of various standards-based language proficiency instruments to inform instruction and the value
of data for identification, placement, and demonstration of language proficiency and academic achievement of English
Learners.

5.5   Knowledge of the difference between language proficiency testing and other types of assessment (e.g., standardized
achievement tests of overall mastery) as they affect English Learners.

5.6   Knowledge of the relationship between standards and assessment decisions.

5.7   Knowledge and use of a variety of assessment accommodations appropriate to the needs of English Learners.

                                              Standard 6: Professionalism

Candidates for endorsement in English as a Second Language will demonstrate:

6.1   Knowledge of culturally responsive teaching practices.

6.2   Knowledge of the additive value that multilingualism brings to the overall success of all students and an
understanding of the teacher’s role as an advocate with students, colleagues, and members of the community in promoting
and developing multilingualism.

6.3   An ability to identify, analyze, and reflect upon professional knowledge and language proficiency, and seek resources
for improvement.

6.4   Knowledge of legislative impact on teaching in programs for world languages, English Learners, and bilingual
education.

6.5   Knowledge of the teacher’s role as a professional within a discipline.

6.6    Knowledge of the history and current state of teaching world languages, English Learners, and bilingual students as it
affects public policy and advocacy issues.




                                                                                                                           15
                              English as a Second Language (NS) Content Standards



6.7   An ability to serve as a professional resource, advocate for students, and build partnerships with students’ families
and communities.




                                                                                                                        16
