Standards for the Preparation
     of PK-12 Teachers
  Professional Knowledge and Skills




   Arts, Languages, Health/Physical
   Education, and Special Education




     MICHIGAN
     Departme~lEducation
         Introduction to Standards for the Preparation of PK-12 Teachers
                        Professional Knowledge and Skills


Development of the Standards
Since 2015, the Michigan Department of Education (MDE), in collaboration with
Michigan’s stakeholders, have been working to revise Michigan’s teacher
certification structure and to improve the preparation of the educator workforce in
Michigan. This is in direct alignment with the MDE’s Top 10 Strategic Education
Plan.

This collaboration has led to the design of a structure that places students at the
heart of the system. A key goal of this structure is deeper preparation of teachers
to meet the unique learning, developmental, and social-emotional needs of children
at each grade level. This structure includes focused grade bands to provide new
teachers with specialized knowledge about the students and the content they will
teach and defined clinical experiences and foundational coursework for each grade
band.

The work on the certification restructuring began with the development of Early
Elementary (PK-3) and Upper Elementary (3-6) Standards for Teacher Preparation,
which included Professional Knowledge and Skills Standards as well as content-
specific standards. Following that work, secondary-level stakeholders convened and
developed teacher preparation standards in Professional Knowledge and Skills for
Middle Grades (5-9) and High School (7-12) grade bands as well as discipline-
specific standards.

With the State Board of Education (SBE) approval of Professional Knowledge and
Skills Standards for the PK-3, 3-6, 5-9, and 7-12 grade bands, MDE and educator
preparation providers (EPP) turned their attention to Professional Knowledge and
Skills Standards for the disciplines that cross multiple grade bands to encompass
the full range of PK-12.

These include:
   • Arts: Visual Arts, Music
   • Languages: World Language, Bilingual Education, English as a Second
      Language
   • Health/Physical Education
   • Special Education: Cognitive Impairment, Speech/Language Impairment,
      Physical/Health Impairment, Emotional Impairment, Visual Impairment, Deaf
      and Hard of Hearing, Learning Disabilities, Physical Education for Students
      with Disabilities, Autism Spectrum Disorder

Beginning PK-12 teachers must have a strong understanding of the developmental
stages of the students as well as sufficient depth and breadth of discipline-specific
knowledge and skills. It is important to note that these teachers will work in a
broad range of developmental levels, from preschool through high school
completion, as well as in diverse specializations as noted above. For both reasons,
powerful preparation programs will weave the Professional Standards into the
content preparation coursework that is aligned with the related discipline-specific
standards. To accomplish this, there is the need for collaboration that involves

January 24, 2022                                                                        2
         Introduction to Standards for the Preparation of PK-12 Teachers
                        Professional Knowledge and Skills


education faculty and discipline-specific faculty in shared conversations regarding
content knowledge pedagogy.

In addition, the Professional Knowledge and Skills Standards reflect the integration
of the Clinical Experiences Requirements and the Core Teaching Practices. The
Clinical Experiences Requirements call for stronger, mutually beneficial partnerships
between EPPs and PK-12 settings, faculty, and administrators. The shared
understanding of and commitment to the Professional Standards among those
involved in these partnerships will strengthen the preparation of beginning
teachers.

PK-12 Professional Knowledge and Skills
The source document for developing the PK-12 Professional Standards was the
5-9/7-12 Professional Standards. This set was chosen over the PK-3/3-6
Professional standards for two reasons:
   1. The 5-9/7-12 standards were written with broader stakeholder input
      throughout the entire standards development process than the corresponding
      PK-3/3-6 standards; and
   2. The 5-9/7-12 standards encompass all the knowledge and skills enumerated
      in the PK-3/3-6 standards.

The three domains within the PK-12 Professional Standards – Learner-Centered
Supports, Ethics and Professional Growth, and Strategic Partnerships – are the
same as those that frame the Professional Standards for the PK-3, 3-6, 5-9, and 7-
12 grade bands, providing consistency across the PK-12 span.

The first domain, P.1. Learner-Centered Supports, has 17 standards in both the
5-9/7-12 and PK-12 sets. There were wording changes in 10 of those standards, six
of which adapted language referencing “adolescents” to “learners” or “whole
child/whole learner” to reflect the broader age range for the new standards.

Similarly, “Individual Family Service Plan” was added to P.1.i as this tool is used
with younger learners. P.1.k was revised slightly by tightening the wording to
emphasize the use of the strategies. P.1.d saw the most changes, with
“developmentally appropriate” replacing “learners’ needs, assets, and interests”,
and other changes removing redundancy with core ideas from a previous standard.
None of these changes fundamentally alter the meaning of the statement.

Four of the five standards in the second domain, P.2. Ethics and Professional
Growth, are the same in 5-9/7-12 standards and the PK-12 standards. In P.2.c,
“adolescent” was changed “whole child/learner” and “student” was changed to
“learner”, both changes intended to reflect the broader age range for this set of
standards.

All six standards in the third domain, P.3. Strategic Partnerships, are the same in
the 5-9/7-12 standards and the PK-12 standards, although they are reordered.


January 24, 2022                                                                        3
         Introduction to Standards for the Preparation of PK-12 Teachers
                        Professional Knowledge and Skills


In summary, no standards were added, and none were removed. Changes in
wording were made in 39% of the standards, although none of them fundamentally
changed the meaning of the statements and were largely intended to reflect the
application of the standards to the broader grade range.

Stakeholder Review
Following the development of proposed Standards for the Preparation of PK-12
Teachers in Professional Knowledge and Skills, a group of 37 stakeholders
representing the four PK-12 discipline areas listed above was invited to review and
confirm the proposed standards. The proposed PK-12 Professional Standards
include the same three domains that frame the Professional Standards for the four
grade bands – Learner-Centered Supports, Ethics and Professional Growth, and
Strategic Partnerships – to provide consistency across Professional Standards sets
for each grade band.

The 37 stakeholders invited to participate in the review represent an appropriate
range of disciplinary specializations and professional roles in the education
ecosystem. Across the four target discipline areas, eight stakeholders represented
Languages, 12 represented the Arts, five represented Health/Physical Education,
and 12 represented Special Education. Across professional roles, 15 were PK-12
teachers, eight were PK-12 administrators, and 14 represented EPPs.
Geographically, stakeholders represented the education ecosystems of the Upper
Peninsula, northern Lower Peninsula, the thumb area, western Michigan, and
southeastern Michigan.

An initial meeting provided an overview of the development of the standards and
the review process. An online questionnaire, consisting of five open-ended
questions, was sent to all participants along with presentation materials from the
initial meeting. The questions and a summary of stakeholders’ responses to each
follows here:

   1. Do the proposed standards address the professional knowledge and skills
      needed to be a teacher of PK-12 students in the arts, languages,
      health/physical education, and special education, regardless of the specific
      discipline?

         The stakeholders indicated support for the proposed standards. Two
         stakeholders did express concerns regarding the reference to “core
         curriculum” in the standard related to English language learners for
         health/PE and the arts as well as the applicability of technology standards
         to those same fields. However, no strong objections were raised.

   2. Are the standards clearly written and understandable? If not, which
      standards require clarification or revision?




January 24, 2022                                                                       4
         Introduction to Standards for the Preparation of PK-12 Teachers
                        Professional Knowledge and Skills


          There was general support for the standards as written, although
          individual stakeholders did have comments and suggestions related to
          some specific statements, including recommendations for rewording if
          appropriate.

   3. What are redundancies in the standards that could be combined?

          There were two suggestions regarding consolidating standards in the first
          domain and one suggestion for moving one standard from the first to the
          second domain.

   4. What is missing that is critical for a well-prepared beginning teacher in these
      disciplines at the PK-12 level?

          Suggestions included specific statements regarding professional
          dispositions and additional standards on classroom management and
          parent communication. A need to clarify what is meant by Strategic
          Partnerships was evident.

   5. What are 3-5 terms, phrases, or words in the standards that should be
      included in a glossary that would accompany the standards?

          The following terms will be defined in glossaries accompanying individual
          grade band professional standards documents:
          • ADA                                  • Professional & Ethical Practice
          • Collaboration                        • Reflective Practice for Continuous
          • Culturally Responsive                  Growth
            Curriculum/Teaching                  • Restorative Practices
          • Differentiation                      • Social-Emotional Engagement
          • Diversity                            • Trauma
          • FERPA                                • Whole Child
          • IDEA                                 • Whole Learner
          • IEP


In summary, the draft PK-12 Professional Knowledge and Skills Standards were
affirmed by the stakeholders in their responses to the online questionnaire. There
were a handful of stakeholder comments seeking clarification about specific
standards and terminology. It is important to consider that these stakeholders
represented different disciplines and may not have brought the same knowledge
base of educational terminology and theory to their review of the standards.

While the professional education coursework is usually developed by faculty in the
teacher education department, discipline-specific faculty focus on the content
standards. This feedback is important, as it will be useful in informing the technical
assistance to support EPPs in program revision to align with the standards and to

January 24, 2022                                                                         5
     Standards for the Preparation of PK-12 Teachers Professional Knowledge
                                    and Skills


facilitate coordination between faculty in teacher education and discipline-specific
departments.




January 24, 2022                                                                       6
     Standards for the Preparation of PK-12 Teachers Professional Knowledge
                                    and Skills


               Professional Knowledge and Skills Standards

P.1. Learner-Centered Supports
Well-prepared beginning teachers will be able to:
   a. Purposefully incorporate approaches to address the cognitive, physical,
      behavioral, social, and emotional needs/development of the whole
      child/whole learner throughout all aspects of teaching and learning.
   b. Recognize and respond appropriately to the multiple influences on the
      development and learning of the whole child/learner, including but not
      limited to cultural, linguistic, religious, gendered, historic, economic, and
      social-emotional contexts.
   c. Evaluate and analyze available curriculum and demonstrate ability to adapt
      or design rigorous, standards-aligned curriculum that reflects learners’
      needs, assets, and interests, and connects the learners’ language, culture,
      and experiences to learning.
   d. Design and implement challenging, standards-based instruction and
      developmentally appropriate learning environments aligned with curriculum
      to build learners’ development in all areas.
   e. Cultivate and manage a learner-centered classroom that leads to learner
      empowerment/ownership, active engagement in exploration and learning,
      positive social interaction and behaviors, and an inclusive classroom
      community through norms, routines, restorative practices, and other non-
      punitive measures.
   f. Utilize individual and collaborative learning environments. Incorporate and
      model for learners’ inter and intrapersonal problem-solving techniques and
      strategies for conflict resolution to develop positive and supportive
      relationships.
   g. Design and enact appropriate instruction (e.g., asset-based, inclusive
      instruction) that leverages the strengths and contributions of all learners
      including the unique developmental needs and related instructional and
      behavioral goals of learners with disabilities.
   h. Demonstrate knowledge of and apply a variety of strategies, instructional
      approaches, behavioral assessments, and positive behavioral interventions
      within the general education learning environment to promote the full
      participation of all learners, including exceptional learners such as learners
      with disabilities, English learners, and advanced learners.
   i. Demonstrate knowledge of Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA)
      and Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) by engaging in the procedural
      development, assessment, and enactment of Individualized Education
      Programs (IEPs) including the Multidisciplinary Evaluation Team process,
      Individualized Family Service Plans (IFSPs), and/or 504 plans.
   j. Design, manage, and implement standards-based content instruction to
      support English learners’ successful engagement with the core curriculum
      while developing English language proficiency, content-area literacy, and
      academic content knowledge.
   k. Utilize a variety of strategies to promote full participation of English learners
      in classrooms.

January 24, 2022                                                                          7
     Standards for the Preparation of PK-12 Teachers Professional Knowledge
                                    and Skills


   l. Acknowledge and reflect on the impact of personal beliefs, biases, privileges,
      and experiences on the equitable interpretation of learner communication
      and behavior.
   m. Address the impact of curriculum, policies, processes, and practices on the
      education of all learners with particular attention to historically underserved
      communities and social identity groups through culturally responsive
      curriculum, instruction, and advocacy.
   n. Identify signs of trauma in learners and respond with trauma-informed and
      resiliency-informed instruction that promotes communication, safety, and a
      sense of belonging in the classroom. Appropriately adjust instruction in
      response to the emotional and social distress in the classroom through
      positive relationships with learners and families.
   o. Administer and analyze outcome-aligned, systematic, formative, summative,
      and standardized observations and assessments. Use assessment data to
      monitor learners' progress, inform instruction, and provide timely and
      constructive feedback to learners and their families.
   p. Engage learners in using metacognitive strategies to reflect on their own
      learning and self-regulation including self-assessment, self-reflection,
      feedback from others, and goal setting (e.g., aligning with IEPs, 504 Plans,
      Personal Curricula, or other official goal documents) as part of the
      assessment process.
   q. Integrate instructional technology, aligned with International Society for
      Technology in Education (ISTE) Standards for Students to empower learners
      as knowledge constructors, creative and analytical thinkers, collaborators,
      and good digital citizens.


P.2. Ethics and Professional Growth
Well-prepared beginning teachers will be able to:
   a. Enact ethical practices aligned with professional, ethical, and legal codes of
      conduct for educators including but not limited to maintaining student and
      family privacy (in accordance with the Family Educational Rights and Privacy
      Act), and adhering to the Michigan Policy for the Emergency Use of Seclusion
      and Restraint and Michigan Code of Educational Ethics.
   b. Use reflective practices to design, monitor, and adapt instruction as a means
      for gauging professional growth.
   c. Engage in formal and informal ongoing professional learning opportunities
      that strengthen instructional practice, understanding of whole child/learner
      development, and learner outcomes.
   d. Model responsible digital citizenship as outlined in ISTE Standards for
      Educators.
   e. Enact ethical practices aligned with state laws related to the responsibilities
      and rights of the teacher in reporting known or suspected abuse, neglect, or
      maltreatment (mandated reporting).




January 24, 2022                                                                        8
     Standards for the Preparation of PK-12 Teachers Professional Knowledge
                                    and Skills


P.3. Strategic Partnerships
Well-prepared beginning teachers will be able to:
   a. Identify valuable contributions and input that all families, caregivers, and
      community stakeholders provide for learners by engaging with them as
      partners and agents in their learners' education.
   b. Use a variety of communication strategies to create mutually beneficial
      relationships with learners, families, caregivers, and communities that
      promote engagement, learning, and agency.
   c. Describe the roles and responsibilities of school professionals and utilize
      them as resources to support learners, classroom instruction, and positive
      classroom climate and culture.
   d. Demonstrate intentional collaborative approaches aimed at assisting a
      learner’s unique social-emotional health, well-being, and academic growth
      through mutually beneficial partnerships with colleagues.
   e. Identify appropriate agencies and other resources in the larger community in
      partnership with school resources to support academic growth, social-
      emotional growth, and well-being of the whole child/learner.
   f. Engage in intentional community and business partnerships beyond the
      school setting to support learners’ interests, expose learning opportunities
      and skills not offered in the classroom, scaffold college and career readiness,
      and develop pipelines to the workforce.




January 24, 2022                                                                        9
