Standards for the Preparation
        of Teachers
    Professional Knowledge and Skills

Middle Grades (5-9) and High School (7-12)




            Michigan State Board of Education


                       Approved


                    August 11, 2020




                             1
Introduction to Standards for the Preparation of Teachers, Professional Knowledge and Skills
                        Middle Grades (5-9) and High School (7-12)

Development of the Standards
Since 2015, the Michigan Department of Education (MDE), in collaboration with
Michigan’s stakeholders, have been working to revise Michigan’s teacher certification
structure and improve the preparation of the educator workforce in Michigan. This is
in direct alignment with the MDE’s Strategic Plan for becoming a Top Ten Education
State within Ten Years.

This collaboration has led to the design of a structure that places students at the
heart of the system. A key goal of this structure is deeper preparation of teachers to
meet the unique learning, developmental, and social-emotional needs of children at
each grade level. This structure includes focused grade bands to provide new
teachers with specialized knowledge about the students and content they will teach
and defined clinical experiences and foundational coursework for each grade band.

Building on the work of the certification restructuring and the revision and adoption
of Early Elementary (PK-3) and Upper Elementary (3-6) Standards for Teacher
Preparation, stakeholder committees consisting of individuals with expertise in
secondary level teacher professional knowledge and skills, English language arts
(ELA), and mathematics were convened to revise standards to align with the new
middle grades (5-9) and high school (7-12) grade bands. These three areas were
selected due to the primacy of importance to teacher preparation programs, the
critical need subjects represented, and the alignment with MDE’s Whole Child and
Literacy foci.

In line with these initiatives, and in response to feedback from educators around the
state, each of these sets of standards has a deep focus on equity, shifting the vision
of a well-prepared beginning teacher at the secondary level from an emphasis on
decontextualized content knowledge and toward an emphasis on classroom practices
that address the diverse social, emotional, developmental, and learning needs of the
whole child. These standards establish a vision of the middle school and high school
classroom as an inclusive space, in which the individual, multifaceted identities of all
children are recognized as assets to support their learning and development. The
standards do not define the English language arts or mathematics curriculum for
these grade bands, but rather define the knowledge, skills, and dispositions teachers
must have in order to achieve this vision of an inclusive space that fulfills all
children’s needs across the several interacting dimensions of the Whole Child.

While the preparation standards for middle grades and high school presented here
are in most areas identical for both grade bands, they are not intended to be
addressed in isolation from other core elements of the teacher preparation
curriculum. Candidates seeking endorsement in either or both grade bands must
engage in clinical experiences across the range of grades incorporated in these bands
(in accordance with Michigan’s Clinical Experiences Requirements) that allow them to
demonstrate proficiency in these standards as well as the Core Teaching Practices in
authentic classroom contexts. Expectations for K-12 student performance in these
discipline areas also vary across the two grade bands, requiring that enactment of
the core instructional competencies and dispositions detailed in these standards may


                                             2
Introduction to Standards for the Preparation of Teachers, Professional Knowledge and Skills
                        Middle Grades (5-9) and High School (7-12)

vary in accordance with the K-12 academic standards and locally adopted curriculum
being addressed in a specific classroom context.

Professional Knowledge and Skills
The purpose of the Standards for the Preparation of Teachers in Professional
Knowledge and Skills in Middle Grades (5-9) and High School (7-12) is to establish a
shared vision for the professional knowledge, skills, and dispositions that entry-level
teachers of middle level and high school students in Michigan should possess and
demonstrate in their teaching. The standards reflect a vision of a well-prepared
beginning teacher who is prepared to enact high-quality instruction in one or more
content areas; address the needs of the whole child; use relevant, research-based
criteria to establish a supportive, engaging environment that fosters learning; and
use practices that meet individual adolescent’s needs.

A stakeholder committee representing Michigan PK-12 educators and administrators,
college and university teacher educators and researchers with specialized knowledge
in secondary teacher education, special education, social-emotional learning, English-
language learners, and trauma-informed instruction began meeting in January of
2019 to create a set of standards outlining professional knowledge and skills for
teachers in grades 5-9 and 7-12. The committee began work by reviewing the
Professional standards of Michigan’s Standards for the Preparation of Teachers of
Upper Elementary (3-6) and utilized the following documents as source material for
this work:

         •   Michigan Standards for the Preparation of Teachers of Upper Elementary
             (3-6) – Professional (2018);
         •   Association of Teacher Educators (ATE) Standards for Teacher Educators
             (2008);
         •   Association for Middle Level Education (AMLE) Middle Level Teacher
             Preparation Standards (2012);
         •   International Literacy Association (ILA) Standards for the Preparation of
             Literacy Professionals, Middle/High School Classroom Teacher (2017);
         •   American Psychological Association Developing Adolescents: A
             Reference For Professionals (2002);
         •   Massachusetts Advocates for Children Helping Traumatized Children
             Learn: Supportive School Environments for Children Traumatized by
             Family Violence (2009);
         •   Center for American Progress Preparing All Teachers to Meet the Needs
             of English Language Learners: Applying Research to Policy and Practice
             for Teacher Effectiveness (2012); and
         •   Region X Equity Assistance Center at Education Northwest Culturally
             Responsive Teaching: A Guide to Evidence-Based Practices for Teaching
             All Students Equitably (2016).

These standards related to professional knowledge and skills in the areas of Learner-
Centered Supports, Ethics and Professional Growth, and Strategic Partnerships were
designed to describe what all beginning teachers should know and be able to do
regardless of their specific discipline area.

                                             3
Introduction to Standards for the Preparation of Teachers, Professional Knowledge and Skills
                        Middle Grades (5-9) and High School (7-12)


In developing these Professional Knowledge and Skills standards, there are three key
considerations that guided the work of the committee. First, there is the recognition
that at the middle level, beginning teachers must have sufficient depth and breadth
of content knowledge and skills; strong understanding of the social-emotional
developmental stages of adolescents; a knowledge of culturally-responsive and
trauma-informed instruction; and strategies to promote equitable learning for all
students in the classroom.

Second, these standards reflect the integration of newly adopted Clinical Experiences
Requirements and the Core Teaching Practices. The full implementation of the Clinical
Experiences Requirements in PK-12 classrooms where teacher candidates have
opportunities to demonstrate and practice professional knowledge and skills,
necessitates stronger, mutually beneficial partnerships between educator preparation
programs and middle and high school faculty, and administrators. The shared
understanding of and commitment to these Professional standards among those
involved in these partnerships will strengthen the preparation of beginning teachers.

The final consideration that underlies the development of these standards is the need
for intentional collaboration between general education, special education, and
English as a second language preparation programs, as the focus on the whole child
and on learner-centered supports blurs the traditional line between these aspects of
the grade 5-9 and 7-12 school context. By building this integration into preparation
programs, all beginning teachers will enter the work force better prepared to engage
in inclusive, equitable teaching through collaboration with other professionals who
are also focused on the needs of the whole child.

Public Comment
Following the presentation of the proposed Standards for the Preparation of Teachers
in Professional Knowledge and Skills, English Language Arts, and Mathematics in
Middle Grades (5-9) and High School (7-12) at the February 11, 2020 State Board of
Education (SBE) meeting, the Office of Educator Excellence solicited public comment
on the proposed standards through April 29, 2020. A total of 201 individuals (PK-12
teachers, teacher candidates, school administrators, teacher educators, education
organization representatives, parents, and interested citizens) participated in the
public comment survey. Feedback was strongly positive, with 78% of respondents
agreeing that the proposed standards would improve the preparation of middle
grades (5-9) teachers, and 76% agreeing that the proposed standards would
improve the preparation of high school (7-12) teachers.

Statements of support for the standards constituted the largest number of open-
ended comments received for each set of standards in both grade levels. Eighteen
respondents specifically praised the standards’ inclusive vision of teaching practices
to support the needs of individual students in Michigan’s increasingly diverse
classrooms.

Eleven respondents stated that the standards needed greater emphasis on
knowledge and skills related to supporting English learners across content areas in

                                             4
Introduction to Standards for the Preparation of Teachers, Professional Knowledge and Skills
                        Middle Grades (5-9) and High School (7-12)

the general education classroom. Within the Professional Knowledge and Skills
standards for both grade bands, multiple standards, such as P.1.j and P.1.k, explicitly
call attention to the needs of English learners. Other standards, such as P.1.d, are
intended to address multiple aspects of student diversity, including English learners.
Within the English Language Arts standards, implicit references to English learners in
standards ELA.2.b, ELA.2.c, ELA.2.d, ELA.4.b, and ELA.4.c were made explicit to
emphasize the need for an intentional focus on preparing teacher candidates to
support this population. The mathematics standards frequently reference “all
learners” which is intended to be inclusive of English learners therefore changes were
not made to these standards. Teacher preparation programs are advised to increase
the curriculum’s emphasis in this area. Technical assistance resources will be
provided to further emphasize the inclusivity of “all learners.”

Eleven respondents expressed general support for the standards but noted that their
effectiveness will depend on how educator preparations implement them through
coursework and clinical experiences. Michigan’s Clinical Experiences Requirements
provide a detailed framework for clinically-based teacher preparation to ensure that
candidates have extensive opportunities to engage with students representing the
diversity of Michigan’s population in authentic school settings. These experiences are
required to be distributed across the arc of a teacher preparation program, not solely
isolated to student teaching. In addition to the Clinical Experiences Requirements,
these standards should also be considered alongside the Core Teaching Practices,
which together with the Professional Knowledge and Skills standards form the basis
for the professional education coursework all teacher candidates will experience,
regardless of disciplinary specialization. Supplemental material to be developed
during the implementation of these standards will include a glossary and
recommended resources to support teacher educators’ and teacher candidates’
understandings of the standards.

Four respondents expressed concern for the balance between content knowledge and
pedagogical training in the standards. All the English language arts and mathematics
standards were written in such a way as to intersect the content knowledge and
pedagogy needed to effectively deliver instruction. Institutions are expected to
provide coursework to ensure beginning teachers have the content knowledge
necessary to address the specific skills described in each of the standards. The
Professional Knowledge and Skills standards address the teaching skills necessary to
build relationships and manage classrooms.

Three respondents expressed concerns with the amount of emphasis the standards
place on equity and advocacy. One respondent felt the emphasis was not strong
enough, while two respondents argued that it was an unnecessary and harmful
overreach in defining teachers’ knowledge and skills. At its March 12, 2019 meeting,
the Michigan SBE adopted a Resolution on Dignity in Schools, which “reaffirms its
commitment to upholding all federal and state civil rights laws; helping school
districts enact policies that improve school climate, safety, and do not have a
disparate impact on students based on their race, sex, LGBTQ status, disability
status, or age; and eliminating the use of ineffective exclusionary discipline and
increasing equity for all students.” State board approved standards provide ways for
the enactment of SBE resolutions supporting equity in schools at the state level.
                                            5
Introduction to Standards for the Preparation of Teachers, Professional Knowledge and Skills
                        Middle Grades (5-9) and High School (7-12)

Teachers, as enactors of SBE policy, engage in advocacy for students at the
classroom and school level in order to encourage and enact equity for all students in
the state.

Furthermore, through its strategic priority of the Whole Child, “MDE believes caring
for, supporting, and educating the whole child is an essential part of promoting
academic achievement and excellence throughout the Prenatal Through Age 20 (P-
20) system.” These standards are intended to support achievement of this priority by
preparing teachers to meet all the needs of the whole child for each individual
learner.

Twelve respondents expressed concerns not about the standards, but rather about
teacher shortages and the effect narrower grade bands will have on the ability of
small schools and districts to make appropriate staffing decisions. These concerns are
addressed by the flexibilities and communications included as part of the OEE’s
proposed appropriate placement policies, which will accompany the implementation
of these preparation standards.




                                             6
Introduction to Standards for the Preparation of Teachers, Professional Knowledge and Skills
                        Middle Grades (5-9) and High School (7-12)

Participants in Standards Development
Michele Anderson, High School Social Studies Teacher, Wayne-Westland Community
      Schools
Carol Baaki Diglio, Consultant, Consulting by Diglio
Dr. Sara Clem von Hohenberg, Coordinator of Secondary Education, Associate
      Professor of Education, Concordia University
Dr. Christina De Nicolo, Program Coordinator/Associate Professor, Wayne State
      University
Dr. Donna Fiebelkorn, Dean, College of Education, Lake Superior State University
Dr. Anthony Tuf Francis, Assistant Professor, Teacher Development and Educational
      Studies, Oakland University
Dr. Ray Francis, Professor, Teacher Educator, Central Michigan University
Dr. Gina Garner, Higher Education Consultant, Michigan Department of Education
Dr. Luana Greulich, Chair of Teaching, Learning, and Curriculum, Professor of Special
      Education, Andrews University
Anne Harkema Penn, District Administrator, Michigan Great Lakes Virtual Academy
Susan Hojnacki, Teacher Educator, Aquinas College
Sharon Hopkins, Principal, UPrep Schools
Melissa Isaac, PK-12 Administrator, Education Director, Saginaw Chippewa Indian
      Tribe
Curtis Lewis, Executive Director, Curriculum, Instruction/Culture, UPrep Schools,
       Detroit 90/90
Meghan Loughlin-Krusky, Principal, Diocese of Lansing
Dr. John Palladino, Professor of Special Education, Eastern Michigan University
Joe Priest, Education Consultant, Michigan Department of Education
Dr. Hakim Shahid, Associate Professor and Chair, Teacher Education, Madonna
      University
Dr. Leah van Belle, Director of School Partnerships & Clinical Practice, Wayne State
      University




                                             7
       Standards for the Preparation of Teachers, Professional Knowledge and Skills
                       Middle Grades (5-9) and High School (7-12)

P.1. Learner-Centered Supports
Well-prepared beginning teachers of students in grades 5-9 & 7-12 will:
   a. Purposefully incorporate approaches to address the cognitive, physical,
      behavioral, social, and emotional needs/development of adolescents (5-9
      whole learner, 7-12 whole learner) throughout all aspects of teaching and
      learning.
   b. Recognize and respond appropriately to the multiple influences on adolescent
      development, including but not limited to cultural, linguistic, religious,
      gendered, historic, economic, and social-emotional contexts throughout all
      aspects of teaching and learning.
   c. Evaluate and analyze available curriculum and demonstrate ability to adapt or
      design rigorous, standards-aligned curriculum that reflects students’ needs,
      assets, and interests; and connects the learners’ language, culture, and
      experiences to learning.
   d. Design challenging, standards-based instruction aligned with curriculum that
      reflects learners’ needs, assets, and interests; and connects the learners’
      language, culture, and experiences to learning.
   e. Cultivate and manage a student-centered classroom that leads to student
      empowerment/ownership, active engagement in exploration and learning,
      positive social interaction and behaviors, and an inclusive classroom
      community through norms, routines, restorative practices, and other non-
      punitive measures.
   f. Utilize individual and collaborative learning environments. Incorporate and
      model for learners inter- and intra- personal problem-solving techniques and
      strategies for conflict resolution to develop positive and supportive
      relationships.
   g. Design and enact appropriate instruction (e.g., asset-based, inclusive
      instruction) that leverages the strengths and contributions of all learners
      including the unique developmental needs and related instructional and
      behavioral goals of adolescents with disabilities.
   h. Demonstrate knowledge of and apply a variety of strategies, instructional
      approaches, behavioral assessments, and positive behavioral interventions
      within the general education learning environment to promote the full
      participation of all adolescents, including exceptional learners such as
      adolescents with disabilities, English learners, and advanced learners.
   i. Demonstrate knowledge of Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA)
      and Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) by engaging in the procedural
      development, assessment, and enactment of Individualized Education
      Programs (IEPs), including the Multidisciplinary Evaluation Team process,
      and/or 504 plans.
   j. Design, manage, and implement standards-based content instruction to
      support English learners’ successful engagement with the core curriculum while
      developing English language proficiency, content-area literacy, and academic
      content knowledge.
   k. Demonstrate knowledge and use of a variety of strategies to promote full
      participation of English learners in classrooms.
   l. Acknowledge and reflect on the impact of personal beliefs, biases, privileges,
      and experiences on the equitable interpretation of learner communication and
      behavior.
                                             8
        Standards for the Preparation of Teachers, Professional Knowledge and Skills
                        Middle Grades (5-9) and High School (7-12)

   m. Address the impact of curriculum, policies, processes, and practices on the
      education of all adolescents, with particular attention to historically
      underserved communities and social identity groups through culturally
      responsive curriculum, instruction, and advocacy.
   n. Identify signs of trauma in adolescents and respond with trauma-informed and
      resiliency-informed instruction that promotes communication, safety, and a
      sense of belonging in the classroom. Appropriately adjust instruction in
      response to the emotional and social distress in the classroom through positive
      relationships with learners and families.
   o. Administer and analyze outcome-aligned, systematic, formative, summative,
      and standardized assessments. Use assessment data to monitor learners'
      progress, inform instruction, and provide timely and constructive feedback to
      learners and their families.
   p. Engage learners in using metacognitive strategies to reflect on their own
      learning and self-regulation, including self-assessment, self-reflection,
      feedback from others, and goal setting (e.g., aligning with IEPs, 504 Plans,
      Personal Curricula, or other official goal documents) as part of the assessment
      process.
   q. Integrate instructional technology, aligned with International Society for
      Technology in Education (ISTE) Standards for Students to empower learners
      as knowledge constructors, creative and analytical thinkers, collaborators, and
      good digital citizens.

P.2. Ethics and Professional Growth
Well-prepared beginning teachers of students in grades 5-9 & 7-12 will:
   a. Enact ethical practices aligned with professional and legal codes of conduct for
      educators including but not limited to maintaining student and family privacy
      (in accordance with the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act), adhering
      to the Michigan Policy for the Emergency Use of Seclusion and Restraint, and
      the Michigan Code of Educational Ethics.
   b. Use reflective practices to design, monitor, and adapt instruction as a means
      for gauging professional growth.
   c. Engage in formal and informal ongoing professional learning opportunities that
      strengthen instructional practice, understanding of adolescent development,
      and student outcomes.
   d. Model responsible digital citizenship as outlined in ISTE Standards for
      Educators.
   e. Enact ethical practices aligned with state laws related to the responsibilities
      and rights of the teacher in reporting known or suspected abuse, neglect, or
      maltreatment (mandated reporting).

P.3. Strategic Partnerships
Well-prepared beginning teachers of students in grades 5-9 & 7-12 will:
   a. Identify valuable contributions and input that all families, caregivers, and
      community stakeholders provide for learners, by engaging with them as
      partners and agents in their learners' education.
   b. Describe the roles and responsibilities of school professionals and utilize them
      as resources to support learners, classroom instruction, and positive classroom
      climate and culture.
                                           9
    Standards for the Preparation of Teachers, Professional Knowledge and Skills
                    Middle Grades (5-9) and High School (7-12)

c. Demonstrate intentional collaborative approaches aimed at assisting a
   learner’s unique social-emotional health, well-being, and academic growth
   through mutually beneficial partnerships with colleagues.
d. Identify appropriate agencies and other resources in the larger community, in
   partnership with school resources, to support academic growth, social-
   emotional growth, and well-being of the whole learner.
e. Use a variety of communication strategies to create mutually beneficial
   relationships with students, families, caregivers, and communities that
   promote engagement, learning, and agency.
f. Engage in intentional community and business partnerships beyond the school
   setting to support learners' interests, expose learning opportunities and skills
   not offered in the classroom, scaffold college and career readiness, and
   develop pipelines to the workforce.




                                        10
