
===PAGE 1===
RULES 
OF THE 
ALABAMA STATE BOARD OF EDUCATION 
CHAPTER 290-3-2 
EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
DIVISION OF TEACHING AND LEARNING 
290-3-2-.01 Definitions, page 101 
290-3-2-.02 Basic Principles, page 109 
290-3-2-.03 Professional Educator Certificate and Professional Leadership Certificate, 
page 119 
290-3-2-.04 Revocation and Suspension of Certificates and Unsuitability Determinations, 
page 122 
290-3-2-.05 Additional Teaching Field Approach Based on a Professional Educator 
Certificate, Experience, and a Test Score, page 128 
290-3-2-.06 Provisional Certificate in a Teaching Field (PCTF) Approach, page 130 
290-3-2-.07 Provisional Certificate in a Career and Technical Teaching Field (PCCT ) 
Approach, page 136 
290-3-2-.08 Professional Certification Following the Provisional Teaching Field or 
Provisional Career and Technical Teaching Field Certificate Approach, 
page 143 
290-3-2-09 Interim Employment Certificate in a Teaching Field (IEC) Approach , 
page 145 
290-3-2-.10 Interim Employment Certificate in an Area of Instructional Support (IEC) 
Approach, page 150 
290-3-2-.11 Provisional Certificate in Library Media or School Counseling (PCLS) 
Approach, page 155 
290-3-2-.12 Business and Industry to Educational Administrator Certificate (BIEA) 
Approach, page 161 
290-3-2-.13 Professional Certification Following the Provisional Certificate in Library 
Media/School Counseling (PCLS) or Business and Industry to Educational 
Administrator (BIEA) Approach, page 165 
290-3-2-.14 Career and Technical Education Additional Teaching Field Approach Based on 
a Professional Educator Certificate, Experience, and an Occupational 
Proficiency Assessment, page 167 
290-3-2-.15 Career and Technical Education Additional Certification in Cooperative 
Education Coordination Approach, page 169 
290-3-2-.16 Career and Technical Education Temporary Certificate (CTE T), page 171 
290-3-2-.17 Degree Equivalent Heath Science Certificate Approach, page 173 
290-3-2-.18 Degree Equivalent Technical Education Certificate Approach, page 181 
290-3-2-.19 Career and Technical Education Certificate to a Professional Educator 
Certificate, page 193 
99 
===PAGE 2===
290-3-2-.20 Certificate Issued by Another State(s), the District of Columbia, U.S. Territory, 
or the Department of Defense Education Activity (DoDEA) Approach, 
page 196 
290-3-2-.21 Child Nutrition Program Director Certificate Approach, page 200 
290-3-2-.22 Council for Accreditation of Counseling and Related Educational Programs 
(CACREP) Approach, page 201 
290-3-2-.23 Additional Certification in Driver and Traffic Safety Education Approach , 
page 202 
290-3-2-.24 Emergency Certificate, page 203 
290-3-2-.25 Foreign Credentials Approach, page 205 
290-3-2-.26 Junior Reserve Officer Training Corps (JROTC) Certificate Approach, 
page 208 
290-3-2-.27 National Board for Professional Teaching Standards (NBPTS) Approach, 
page 209 
290-3-2-.28 Nationally Certified School Psychologist Approach, page 211 
290-3-2-.29 Renewal Requirements: Continuation or Reinstatement, page 212 
290-3-2-.30 Speech-Language Pathology Assistant (SLA) Certificate Approach, 
page 223 
290-3-2-.31 Speech-Language Pathology Professional Educator Certificate (SLP C) 
Approach, page 228 
290-3-2-.32 Speech-Language Pathology Temporary Certificate (SLTC) Approach, 
page 229 
290-3-2-.33 State-Approved Program Approach, page 230 
290-3-2-.34 Substitute Teacher License, page 233 
RESERVED 
Pages 234-240 
100 
===PAGE 3===
  
  
      
     
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.01 290-3-2-.01(7)(c) 
290-3-2-.01 Definitions. 
(1) 32/19. The semester hours required in a teaching field, including at least 32 
semester hours of credit with at least 19 semester hours of upper-division credit. 
(2) Academic Major. The specialized area of study in a discipline that meets a 
senior inst itution’s requirements for an Arts and Sciences major and is on the applicant’s 
official transcript. 
(3) Administrator. When “administrator” is used in conjunction with 
“superintendent,” “administrator” is defined as the chief administrative officer of a nonpublic 
school or nonpublic school system. 
(4) Administrative Experience. Experience as a superintendent or assistant 
superintendent, principal or assistant principal, career and technical administrator or assistant 
career and technical administrator in a P-12 school system(s). 
(5) Alabama Council for Leadership Development (ACLD). The ACLD provides 
advice for the development of a system of professional development for Alabama’s 
instructional leaders. The Council approves professional studies that fully address the Alabama 
Standards for Instructional Leaders and are aligned with the Alabama Standards for 
Professional Development. 
(6) Alabama Educator Certification Assessment Program (AECAP). The 
statewide testing program required by the Alabama State Board of Education for educators as 
a precondition for initial certification in each teaching field or area of instructional support. 
Official score reports must be submitted electronically from the testing service to the Alabama 
State Department of Education. Applicants must meet the requirements of the AECAP in effect 
at the time an application and nonrefundable fee are received in the Educator Certification 
Section. Additional information is in Rule 290-3-2-.02(9). 
(7) Applicant. An individual who meets one of the following definitions: 
(a) An individual who submits an application or for whom an educator preparation 
institution or a prospective or current employer submits an application to the Section for any 
certificate, substitute license, or other license issued by the Alabama State Superintendent of 
Education. 
(b) An individual employed by a local education agency or nonpublic school to act 
in any capacity in which she or he will have unsupervised access to children in an educational 
environment. 
(c) An individual applying for admission to a State-approved educator preparation 
program at an Alabama regionally accredited senior institution for the purpose of earning a 
certificate after completing that program and meeting other current requirements. 
101 
===PAGE 4===
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.01(8) 290-3-2-.01(13) 
(8) Application for Certification. Completed, current official forms and supporting 
documents, including official transcripts and documentation of compliance with the 
requirements of the AECAP, to substantiate a request for certification. Application for 
certification includes initial certification, renewal, changing to a higher level of certification, 
and adding a teaching field and/or an area of instructional support. All requests for certification 
must include at least the current application form(s), the nonrefundable application fee(s) as 
indicated on the current application form(s) and the completion of the criminal history 
background check. A request for certification will not be assigned for review until at least these 
items are received. The application receipt date is the day on which the current application 
form(s) is received in the Educator Certification Section. The Section reserves the right to 
request an updated application form(s) if the application was signed by the applicant more than 
six months prior to receipt in the Section. 
(9) Area. Any teaching field and grade level(s) or instructional support area and 
grade level(s).  
(10) Candidate. A pre-service or in-service person enrolled in a senior institution for 
the purpose of earning initial or advanced certification in a teaching field or area of 
instructional support or for professional development purposes.  
(11) Certificate. The official document issued by the Alabama State Department of 
Education to an applicant who has been deemed to meet all requirements for the issuance of 
the document. Printed information on the document includes the name of the applicant to 
whom it was issued, the date each area was issued, the degree level(s), valid period(s), and the 
specific teaching field(s) and/or area(s) of instructional support and grade level(s). Information 
on proper certification is in Rule 290-3-2-.01(40). 
(12) Certification Officer. One person, designated by the head of the educator 
preparation unit at an Alabama regionally accredited senior institution of higher education with 
State-approved educator preparation programs, who is authorized to represent the unit. 
Responsibilities of the certification officer include but are not limited to: 
(a) Verifying to the Alabama State Department of Education that an applicant for a 
certificate has successfully completed the State-approved program for the certificate sought 
and is recommended for certification. 
(b) Verifying whether an applicant for a Special Alternative Certificate has met State 
requirements for unconditional admission to a State-approved program in the teaching field or 
area of instructional support for which the certificate is sought. 
(c) Responding to requests for information from the Alabama State Department of 
Education. 
(13) Child Abuse Crime. As defined in Act 2002-457, any crime committed under 
the law of the state that involves the physical or mental injury, sexual abuse or exploitation, or 
maltreatment of a child. Conviction of this crime shall cause an applicant to be deemed 
unsuitable for employment. Additional information about suitability determinations is in 
Rule 290-3-2-.01(54). 
102 
===PAGE 5===
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.01(14) 290-3-2-.01(26) 
(14) Church-related / Parochial School. Includes only schools which offer 
instruction in Grades P-12, or any combination thereof, through on-site or home programs and 
are operated as a ministry of a local church, group of churches, denomination, and/or 
association of churches which do not receive any state or federal funding.  Refer to Ala. Code 
§16-28-1 (1975).  
(15) Criminal History Background Check. Information received from the Alabama 
State Bureau of Investigation (ASBI) and the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), resulting 
from a fingerprint review. Additional information is in Rule 290-3-2-.02(8). 
(16) Department. Alabama State Department of Education. 
(17) DoDEA. Department of Defense Education Activity. 
(18) Educational Administrator. When used in this chapter or in applying Rules of 
the Alabama State Board of Education, the term applies to a person who holds a previously 
issued or current Alabama certificate as a career and technical administrator, educational 
administrator, instructional leader, principal, superintendent, or superintendent-principal. 
(19) Educator Preparation Program. A State-approved program at an Alabama 
senior institution, a state-approved program at a senior institution in another state, or a program 
in another country leading to professional educator certification within grades P-12 as a teacher 
or as a provider of instructional support (administrator, counselor, librarian, psychologist, 
psychometrist, speech language pathologist, sport manager, and/or supervisor).  
(20) Form. Official, required document(s) completed by or for applicants for a variety 
of purposes. Any reference to a form in this chapter means the current version of the form. 
(21) GPA (Grade Point Average). In this chapter, all GPA requirements pertain to 
calculations on a four-point scale. Appropriate adjustments shall be made for other scales. 
GPAs may not be rounded. For example, a GPA of 2.74 cannot be rounded to 2.75. The 
official overall GPA is the GPA posted on the official transcript of the degree granting 
institution that was used as the basis for granting the degree.  
(22) Initial Certificate. The first Alabama certificate in each specific teaching field 
or area of instructional support issued to an educator. 
(23) Instructional Leader. When used in this chapter or in applying the Rules of the 
Alabama State Board of Education, the term applies to a person who holds a previously issued 
or current Alabama certificate as a career and technical administrator, educational 
administrator, instructional leader, principal, superintendent, superintendent-principal, or 
supervisor. 
(24) Instructional Support Areas. The area(s) and grade level(s) printed on the 
certificate to which a person may be assigned and deemed properly certified. Area(s) include 
career and technical administrator, educational administrator, instructional leader, library 
media specialist, principal, school counselor, school psychologist, school psychometrist, 
speech language pathologist, sport manager, superintendent, superintendent-principal, and 
supervisor. 
(25) Issuing Authority. The official state agency responsible for awarding educator 
credentials for grades P-12, or DoDEA. 
(26) K (Kindergarten). In Alabama schools and as used in this chapter, kindergarten 
refers to programs for five-year olds. 
103 
===PAGE 6===
 
  
 
     
   
  
 
    
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.01(27) 290-3-2-.01(30) 
(27)  Levels of Professional Educator Certificates. 
(a) Class B: Bachelor’s degree level. 
(b) Class A: Master’s degree level program of at least 30 semester hours of graduate 
credit in a teaching field or instructional support area. Coursework used to meet Class B 
certification or bachelor’s degree requirements may not be used toward the issuance of higher 
level certification in any area. Coursework for which credit was applied toward the issuance 
of a previous level of certification, in any area, may not be used toward the issuance of higher 
level certification in any area. 
(c) Class AA: Planned sixth-year program of at least 30 semester hours of graduate 
credit, which may result in an education specialist degree. Coursework used to meet Class A 
certification or master’s degree requirements may not be used toward the issuance of higher 
level certification in any area. Coursework for which credit was applied toward the issuance 
of a previous level of certification, in any area, may not be used toward the issuance of higher 
level certification in any area. 
(28)  Levels of Professional Leadership Certificates. 
(a) Class A: Master’s degree level program of at least 30 semester hours of graduate 
credit. Coursework used to meet Class B certification or bachelor’s degree requirements may 
not be used toward the issuance of higher level certification in any area. Coursework for which 
credit was applied toward the issuance of a previous level of certification, in any area, may not 
be used toward the issuance of higher level certification in any area. 
(b) Class AA: Planned sixth year program of at least 30 semester hours of graduate 
credit, which may result in an education specialist degree. Coursework used to meet Class A 
certification or master’s degree requirements may not be used toward the issuance of higher 
level certification in any area. Coursework for which credit was applied toward the issuance 
of a previous level of certification, in any area, may not be used toward the issuance of higher 
level certification in any area. 
(29) Mentor. When used in this chapter in regard to an Alternative Baccalaureate-
Level Certificate, Career and Technical Alternative Baccalaureate-Level Certificate, Special 
Alternative Certificate, Preliminary Certificate, Preliminary Certificate Through Exception, 
Business and Industry to Educational Administration Certificate, Provisional, or Interim 
Employment Certificate the term “mentor” is defined as a teacher or instructional support 
employee of a P-12 public school or a P-12 nonpublic school who has at least three full years 
of professional educational work experience; has demonstrated effectiveness in the 
performance of his or her work; has demonstrated excellence in communicating and 
collaborating with colleagues; and is designated by the superintendent or administrator to 
provide guidance, support, and assistance in the development and improvement of the 
professional skills and understanding to a beginning teacher or instructional support person. 
The mentor should hold a valid certificate in the same teaching field or area of instructional 
support for which the individual to be mentored is seeking certification. 
(30) Nonpublic School. Includes P-12 schools that are church-related/parochial, 
federally operated, special schools that are supported by the state, and schools that are not 
public. Additional information is in the definition of church-related/parochial school in 
Rule 290-3-2-.01(14). 
104 
===PAGE 7===
 
 
   
 
  
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION  
290-3-2-.01(31) 290-3-2-.01(37) 
(31) Official Transcript. A college or university transcript that has been received 
directly from the issuing institution or from a Department approved electronic transcript 
delivery agent that bears the college/university seal, date of transcript issuance, and the 
signature of the Registrar. 
(32) P (Preschool or Pre-K). Any level prior to kindergarten. 
(33) Professional Development. Sustained and collaborative activities for teachers 
and instructional support personnel designed to increase the academic achievement of all 
students. The activities must strengthen pedagogical knowledge and promote the acquisition 
of research-based strategies. For currently employed Alabama educators, the need for such 
activities must be supported by data from local schools. Professional development plans must 
be approved by the employing superintendent or administrator. 
(34) Professional Educational Work Experience. Acceptable employment in a 
teaching field or an area of instructional support. Additional information is in Rule 290-3-2-
.02(10). 
(35) Professional Educator Certificate. A certificate to teach in grades P-12 that is 
issued by the Alabama State Department of Education based on at least an earned bachelor’s 
degree from a regionally accredited senior institution except as prescribed in 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(7 )(c). A certificate to provide instructional support (counselor, librarian, 
psychologist, psychometrist, speech-language pathologist, sport manager) in grades P-12 that 
is issued by the Alabama State Department of Education based on at least an earned master’s 
degree from a regionally accredited senior institution. Issuance of the Professional Educator 
Certificate is based on completion of a State-approved approach to certification. Since January 
2010, administrative and supervisory certificates are no longer printed on the certificate 
entitled Professional Educator Certificate.  
(36) professional educator certificate. A certificate to teach in grades P-12 that is 
issued by the certificate issuing authority in another state or DoDEA based on at least an earned 
bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited senior institution . A certificate to provide 
instructional support (administrator, counselor, librarian, psychologist, psychometrist, sport 
manager, supervisor) in grades P-12 that is issued by the certificate issuing authority in another 
state or DoDEA and is based on at least an earned master’s degree. 
(37) Professional Leadership Certificate. A certificate to provide leadership (career 
and technical administrator, educational administrator, instructional leader, principal, 
superintendent, superintendent-principal, and supervisor) in grades P-12 that is issued by the 
Alabama State Department of Education and is based on at least an earned mas ter’s degree 
from a regionally accredited senior institution and completion of a State-approved approach to 
certification. Since January 2010, administrative and supervisory certificates are printed on the 
certificate entitled Professional Leadership Certificate. Prior to January 2010, administrative 
and supervisory certificates were printed on the certificate entitled Professional Educator 
Certificate. 
105 
===PAGE 8===
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION  
290-3-2-.01(38) 290-3-2-.01(43)(d) 
(38) Professional Learning Unit.   A Professional Learning Unit (PLU) is a content 
driven, long-term unit of professional study for instructional leaders that fully addresses all 
knowledge and ability indicators under an Alabama Standard for Instructional Leaders. 
Professional study that constitutes a PLU requires multiple professional development 
experiences over time and will always be aligned with the Alabama Standards for Professional 
Development. A PLU is earned at the completion of professional study which fully addresses 
the knowledge and ability indicators under an Alabama Standard for Instructional Leaders. The 
professional study must include comprehensive coverage and evaluation of effectiveness in the 
school setting. Professional study that earns a PLU must be approved either by the Alabama 
Council for Leadership Development (ACLD) or approved by an Alabama city or county 
superintendent or an administrator of an Alabama nonpublic school. 
(39) Program Checklist. An official document identifying all courses required to 
complete a State-approved educator preparation program. Program checklists are submitted by 
an institution and approved by the Alabama State Board of Education following a review. The 
official State-approved checklist will be used as the basis for issuing a certificate. Additional 
information on program approval is in the current Educator Preparation Chapter of the 
Alabama Administrative Code. If institutions modify the format of the State-approved program 
checklist to facilitate advisement, all requirements on the official program checklist must be 
included on the modified forms. 
(40) Proper Certification. Proper certification is defined as having a valid Alabama 
certificate in the teaching field(s) and/or area(s) of instructional support in which the person is 
assigned throughout the school day. The current edition of the Subject and Personnel Codes 
of the Alabama State Department of Education shall be used to determine whether an 
individual holds proper certification for his or her assignments throughout the school day.  
(41) Reasonable Suspicion. Reasonable articulable grounds to believe that a crime 
has been committed by the individual. 
(42) Receipt Date. The date a document is received and date stamped by the Educator 
Certification Section. The date a fee is received in the Educator Certification Section. 
(43) Regional Accrediting Agency. The six regional accrediting agencies recognized 
by the U.S. Secretary of Education and the Department are: 
(a) Middle States Commission on Higher Education for institutions of higher 
education in Delaware, the District of Columbia, Maryland, New Jersey, New York, 
Pennsylvania,  Puerto Rico,  and the  U.S. Virgin Islands.   
(b) New England Association of Schools and Colleges, Commission on Institutions 
of Higher Education for institutions of higher education in Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, 
New Hampshire, Rhode Island, and Vermont.  
(c) Higher Learning Commission of the North Central Association of Colleges and 
Universities, for institutions of higher education in Arizona, Arkansas, Colorado, Illinois, 
Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, New Mexico, North 
Dakota, Ohio, Oklahoma, South Dakota, West Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming, including 
schools of the Navajo Nation.  
(d) Northwest Commission on Colleges and Universities for institutions of higher 
education in Alaska, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, Oregon, Utah, and Washington. 
106 
===PAGE 9===
  
  
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.01(43)(e) 290-3-2-.01(54) 
(e) Southern Association of Colleges and Schools, Commission on Colleges for 
institutions of higher education in Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Louisiana, 
Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas, and Virginia. 
(f) Western Association of Schools and Colleges, Accrediting Commission for 
Senior Colleges and Universities for institutions of higher education in California, Hawaii, 
the United States territories of Guam and American Samoa, the Republic of Palau, the 
Federated States of Micronesia, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, and the 
Republic of the Marshall Islands. 
(44) Regionally Accredited. Refers to action taken by one of the regional accrediting 
agencies in Rule 290-3-2-.01(43) and is specific to the status of the institution at the time credit 
or degrees were earned. 
(45) Renewal. The continuation of a valid certificate with a new valid period or the 
reinstatement of an expired certificate with a new valid period. Additional information is in 
Rule 290-3-2-.29. 
(46) Revocation. The process of taking adverse action against a certificate, substitute 
teacher license, or other license. 
(47) Scholastic Year. Begins with the first day of July and ends with the thirtieth day 
of June each year.  Refer to Ala. Code §16-1-1 (1975). 
(48) Section. The Educator Certification Section of the Office of Teaching and 
Leading of the Alabama State Department of Education. 
(49) Senior Institution. A college or university that confers at least the bachelor’s 
degree. 
(50) State. Any state or commonwealth, the District of Columbia, the Department of 
Defense Education Activity, or territory of the United States of America. 
(51) State-approved Approach. The various methods of obtaining a Professional 
Educator Certificate or a Professional Leadership Certificate that have been approved by the 
Alabama State Board of Education. 
(52) State-approved Program . An educator preparation program at an Alabama 
regionally accredited senior institution of higher education that has been formally approved by 
the Alabama State Board of Education on the basis of Alabama standards. All of the courses 
in an approved educator preparation program shall be indicated on an Alabama State 
Department of Education form called a program checklist. 
(53) state-approved Program. An educator preparation program at a college or 
university in another state that has been approved by the Department of Education in that state 
based on its standards. 
(54) Suitability Determination. Determination issued by the Alabama State 
Superintendent of Education to employing superintendents, administrators, or applicants in 
response to a criminal history background ch eck indicating an applicant’s or current 
employee's fitness for employment as prescribed in Act 2002-457. 
107 
===PAGE 10===
-
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.01(55) 290-3-2-.01 History 
(55) Superintendent. In this chapter, the Alabama State Superintendent of Education 
shall be designated as the Superintendent.  
(56) superintendent. In this chapter, an Alabama city, county, or other public school 
superintendent shall be designated as a superintendent. 
(57) Supervisor. When used in this chapter or in applying Rules of the Alabama State 
Board of Education, the term applies to a person who holds a previously issued or current 
Alabama certificate as a supervisor. 
(58) Supervisory Experience. Experience directing an educational program at the 
central office level of a P-12 school system(s). 
(59) Teacher. When used in this chapter or in applying the Rules of the Alabama 
State Board of Education, the term applies to a person who holds a previously issued or current 
Alabama certificate for a teaching field. 
(60) Teaching Field. Subject(s) and grade level(s) printed on a certificate to which a 
person may be assigned and deemed properly certified. Additional information about proper 
certification is in Rule 290-3-2-.01(40). 
(61) Upper-Division. Coursework designated by an institution of higher education to 
be at the junior or senior level of undergraduate study. 
(62) Valid. In effect; not expired. 
(63) Valid Period. The dates during which a certificate or license is in effect. 
Author: Dr. Thomas R. Bice. 
Statutory Authority: Ala. Const. Amend. 284, Ala. Code §§16-3-11, 16-23-1 and 16-23-2 (1975). 
History: New 12-19-78, repealed 12-8-94, effective 12-31-96; new adopted 12-8-94, effective 1-1-97, repealed 11-14-96 and 
amended repealed date of original chapter to 6-30 -97 new adopted 1-9-97 effective 7-1-97; amended: 6-14 -99; effective 7-
19-99; amended: 9-9-99; effective 10- 14-99, repealed and new adopted 06- 13-02; emergency Rule to appeal and adopt new 
filed on 6- 13-02; new adopted 8-8-02, effective 9-12-02; emergency Rule to appeal and adopt new filed on 10-10 -02; new 
adopted 12-12 -02, effective 1-16 -03; repealed and new adopted 09- 11-03 effective 10-16-03; emergency amended Rule 
adopted 4-14-05, effective 4-14 -05; amended Rule adopted 6-9-05, effective 7-14-05; repealed and adopted new, 8-4-08, 
effective 9-18-08; repealed and adopted new 12-9-10, effective 1-14 -11; repealed and adopted new 3- 10-16, effective 4-24-
16. 
108 
===PAGE 11===
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION  
290-3-2-.02 290-3-2-.02(2)(d) 
290-3-2-.02 Basic Principles. 
(1) Certification Authority. 
(a) The Educator Certification Section shall be the sole office within the Alabama 
State Department of Education to issue certificates and licenses and to implement Alabama 
laws and Rules adopted by the Alabama State Board of Education relating to the certification 
of teachers and instructional support personnel for preschool through Grade 12 (P-12). Rules, 
standards, directives, and memoranda written prior to adoption of these Rules are invalid and 
shall not be used to determine the application of these Rules. These Rules shall apply to all 
individuals whose applications for certification have a receipt date of on or after May 1, 2016, 
unless otherwise noted throughout this chapter.   
(b) Unless otherwise provided by law, the educator certification Rules in this chapter 
shall be the sole authority by which certification is administered. Only the Alabama State 
Superintendent of Education shall have the authority to make exceptions to these Rules. 
Additional information on the certification authority of the State Superintendent of Education 
is in Rule 290-3-2-.04. 
(c) Certificates issued by another state, DoDEA, or another certificate issuing 
authority may not be validated as the authority of their holders to teach in Alabama schools. 
(d) State certification Rules grant broad general authority but ensure uniformity of 
administration. 
(e) State certification Rules allow modifications to supporting policies and 
procedures to facilitate adoption and implementation of new technologies and improved 
business processes. 
(2) Proper Certification. 
(a) Each person who serves as a teacher or in an instructional support personnel 
position in the public schools of the State is required to hold a valid Alabama certificate as 
prescribed in Ala. Code §16-23-1 (1975). 
(b) Each person who serves as a private tutor is required to hold a valid Alabama 
certificate as prescribed in Ala. Code §16-28-5 (1975). 
(c) Proper certification is defined as having a valid Alabama certificate in the 
teaching field(s) and/or area(s) of instructional support in which the person is assigned 
throughout the school day. The current edition of the Subject and Personnel Codes of the 
Alabama State Department of Education, which is updated annually, shall be used to determine 
whether a person holds proper certification for his or her assignments throughout the school 
day. 
(d) An individual who is assigned one or more periods per day in a teaching field in 
which he or she is not properly certified will cause a penalty of a minimum of $500.00 per 
teacher per year to be assessed against the employing board of education. Additional 
information about proper certification is in Rule 290-3-2-.01(40). Additional information about 
the penalty is in Rule 290-2-1-.01. All teachers must be paid according to the State Minimum 
Salary Schedule. Additional information about the schedule is in Rule 290-2-1-.01. 
109 
===PAGE 12===
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.02(3) 290-3-2-.02(5)(c) 
(3)     Highly Qualified Teacher.  A teacher may be officially designated highly 
qualified by the Alabama State Superintendent of Education in a specific core academic subject 
area(s) and grade level(s) based on having met criteria outlined in the current edition of The 
Alabama Model for Identifying Highly Qualified Teachers . Highly Qualified Teacher status 
may be verified on the Educator Certification Section of the Departmental website. 
(4) Alabama Special Requirements 
(a) Completion of a criminal history background check as required by the Alabama 
Child Protection Act of 1999, as amended, and in Rule 290-3-2-.02(8). 
(b) Verification, on the current application form for each certification approach, of 
citizenship or nationality status as required by the Beason-Hammon Alabama Taxpayer & 
Citizen Protection Act 2011-535, and as amended, by Alabama Act No. 2012-491. 
(c) Completion of requirements of the Alabama Educator Certification Assessment 
Program (AECAP) as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.02(9). 
(5) Applications. 
(a) An applicant must meet all certification requirements for the selected approach 
to certification in effect on the receipt date of the application. 
(b) Requirements must be met at the time of application receipt. An applicant who 
submits an incomplete application for certification must submit the additional required 
documentation within the 60 day period beginning with the date of a letter from the Educator 
Certification Section indicating the requirements yet to be verified. If the required 
documentation is not received in the Section within that 60 day period, the applicant must 
submit a current application, submit another nonrefundable fee, and meet requirements in 
effect on the receipt date of the new application. 
(c) Applicants required to successfully complete the Alabama Educator Certification 
Assessment Program (AECAP) must submit verification of meeting the test requirements 
within the 6 month period beginning with the date of a letter from the Educator Certification 
Section indicating certificate eligibility status. If the testing requirements are not met or 
verification is not received in the Section within that 6 month period, the applicant must submit 
a current application, submit another nonrefundable fee, and meet requirements in effect on 
the receipt date of the new application. Some approaches to certification require successful 
completion of the AECAP at a specific time and must be met as prescribed in this chapter. 
110 
===PAGE 13===
      
     
    
      
   
     
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.02(6) 290-3-2-.02(7)(e) 
(6) Application Fee. 
(a) The Educator Certification Section shall collect fees for certification purposes 
pursuant to Ala. Code § 16-23-4 (1975). 
(b) Each application for certification must be accompanied by a $30.00 
nonrefundable fee. 
1. If the applicant is eligible or becomes eligible for certification within 60 days or 
6 months as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.02(5), a certificate will be issued. Additional fee(s) 
may be requested for certification in more than one area. 
2. If the applicant does not become eligible for certification within 60 days or 6 
months as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.02(5), an Emergency Certificate or Substitute License 
may be issued for a qualified applicant at the request of an employing superintendent or 
administrator.  Otherwise, the $30.00 fee is non-transferable and will be forfeited.   
3. If eligibility requirements are not met within 60 days or 6 months as prescribed 
in Rule 290-3-2-.02(5), the applicant must submit a current application, submit another 
nonrefundable fee, and meet requirements in effect on the receipt date of the new application. 
(c) A cashier’s check, money order, or receipt for online payment through the 
Department approved payment system is required. No other form of payment is accepted. 
Money orders and cashier’s checks must be payable to the Alabama State Department of 
Education. 
(d) All fees are nonrefundable. 
(7) Minimum Degree and Academic Requirements. 
(a) Specific degree requirements must be met in the Rules as prescribed in this 
chapter. 
(b) An applicant whose only degree is a bachelor’s degree that has been earned from 
a non-regionally accredited senior institution may apply for a Class B Professional Educator 
Certificate with acceptable verification that all of the following conditions have been met: 
1. Completion of a state-approved educator preparation program. 
2. Valid professional educator certificate from another state or DoDEA in an area in 
which Alabama offers comparable certification at the Class B level. 
3. Nine semester hours of graduate credit with grades of “B” or above earned from 
an Alabama institution with State-approved programs and posted on the official transcript of 
that institution. 
(c) An applicant who holds a bachelor’s degr ee from a non-regionally accredited 
senior institution and a bachelor’s or higher degree from a regionally accredited senior 
institution shall have both degrees recognized for certification purposes. 
(d) Degrees above the bachelor’s level earned from non-regionally accredited senior 
institutions will not be recognized for certification purposes. 
(e) Remedial courses will not be recognized for certification purposes. Other than 
remedial, these courses may be called compensatory, developmental, or basic skills. These 
courses are usually numbered below 100. 
111 
===PAGE 14===
-
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.02(8) 290-3-2-.02(8)(a)3.(iv) 
(8) Criminal History Background Check. 
(a) Effective July 1, 2002, an applicant for certification/licensure or an applicant 
employed by a local school system or nonpublic school who will have unsupervised access to 
children in an educational environment and who has not completed a background check since 
July 1, 1999, as required by the Alabama Child Protection Act of 1999, as amended, shall be 
required to be fingerprinted for a criminal history background check through the Alabama 
Bureau of Investigation (ABI) and the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) pursuant to Act 
2002-457. 
1. The applicant shall be fingerprinted by the approved third party contractor 
designated by the Alabama Department of Education who has been trained to take acceptable 
fingerprints. 
2. An applicant for certification/licensure: 
(i) Shall be fingerprinted by the approved third party contractor designated by the 
Alabama Department of Education who has been trained to take acceptable fingerprints, submit 
the required nonrefundable and nontransferable fee, and authorize the Alabama Department of 
Public Safety to conduct a criminal history background check and allow the release of any 
criminal history information to the Alabama Department of Education; and 
(ii) After a suitability determination by the Alabama State Superintendent of 
Education, the appropriate certificate shall be issued, if other requirements for certification are 
met. 
3. An applicant recommended for employment by a local employing board of a 
public school: 
(i) Shall be fingerprinted by the approved third party contractor designated by the 
Alabama Department of Education who has been trained to take acceptable fingerprints, submit 
the required nonrefundable and nontransferable fee, and authorize the Alabama Department of 
Public Safety to conduct a criminal history background check and allow the release of any 
criminal history information to the Alabama Department of Education; and 
(ii) Shall be issued a suitability determination from the Alabama State Superintendent 
of Education if the individual is a certified applicant for employment; or 
(iii) Shall be issued a clear report or a report consisting of confirmed convictions and 
pending criminal charges if the individual is a noncertified applicant for employment; and 
(iv) Shall have the suitability determination or report issued to the local employing 
superintendent. 
112 
===PAGE 15===
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.02(8)(a)4. 290-3-2-.02(8)(b)2.(ii) 
4. An applicant recommended for employment in a nonpublic school: 
(i) Shall be fingerprinted by the approved third party contractor designated by the 
Alabama Department of Education who has been trained to take acceptable fingerprints, submit 
the required nonrefundable and nontransferable fee, and authorize the Alabama Department of 
Public Safety to conduct a criminal history background check and allow the release of any 
criminal history information to the Alabama Department of Education; and 
(ii) Shall have a suitability determination issued by the Alabama State Superintendent 
of Education to the administrator of the nonpublic school requesting the determination. 
(b) Effective July 1, 2002, a current certified/licensed or noncertified employee who 
has or will have unsupervised access to children in an educational environment and who has 
not completed a background check since July 1, 1999, through the ABI and the FBI for the 
purposes of Alabama certification/licensure or employment with a local employing board or 
nonpublic school shall be required to submit fingerprints for a background check pursuant to 
Act 2002-457. 
1. Any current certified/licensed or noncertified employee in a public school 
system: 
(i) Shall be fingerprinted by the approved third party contractor designated by the 
Alabama Department of Education who has been trained to take acceptable fingerprints, submit 
the required nonrefundable and nontransferable fee, and authorize the Alabama Department of 
Public Safety to conduct a criminal history background check and allow the release of any 
criminal history information to the to the Alabama Department of Education; 
(ii) Shall be issued a suitability determination from the Alabama State Superintendent 
of Education; and 
(iii) Shall have the same suitability determination issued to the local employing 
superintendent. 
2. Any current certified/licensed or noncertified employee in a nonpublic school: 
(i) Shall be fingerprinted by the approved third party contractor designated by the 
Alabama Department of Education who has been trained to take acceptable fingerprints, submit 
the required nonrefundable and nontransferable fee, and authorize the Alabama Department of 
Public Safety to conduct a criminal history background check and allow the release of any 
criminal history information to the Alabama Department of Education; and 
(ii) Shall have a suitability determination issued by the Alabama State Superintendent 
of Education to the administrator of the nonpublic school requesting the determination. 
113 
===PAGE 16===
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.02(8)(c) 290-3-2-.02(8)(e) 
(c) Effective July 1, 2002, a background check shall be required for any current 
employee and any new employee of the Alabama Department of Education who has 
unsupervised access to and provides education, training, instruction, or supervision for children 
in an educational setting. 
1. An Alabama Department of Education employee shall be fingerprinted by the 
approved third party contractor designated by the Alabama Department of Education who has 
been trained to take acceptable fingerprints, submit the required nonrefundable and 
nontransferable fee, and authorize the Alabama Department of Public Safety to conduct a 
criminal history background check and allow the release of any criminal history information 
to the Alabama Department of Education. 
2. An Alabama Department of Education employee shall be issued a suitability 
determination by the Alabama State Superintendent of Education. 
(d) Effective no later than the beginning of the fall 2008 semester, any candidate 
applying for admission to a State-approved teacher education program shall be required to be 
fingerprinted for a criminal history background check through the Alabama Department of 
Education to the Alabama Bureau of Investigation (ABI) and the Federal Bureau of 
Investigation (FBI) pursuant to Act 2002-457. 
1. The candidate shall be fingerprinted by the approved third party contractor 
designated by the Alabama Department of Education who has been trained to take acceptable 
fingerprints, submit the required nonrefundable and nontransferable fee, and authorize the 
Alabama Department of Public Safety to conduct a criminal history background check and 
allow the release of any criminal history information to the Alabama Department of Education. 
2. The candidate shall be issued a suitability determination from the State 
Superintendent of Education. The candidate must provide the designated official of the teacher 
education unit documentation of having cleared the criminal history background check prior 
to admission to a State-approved teacher education program.  
3. A candidate whose suitability determination precludes admission to a State-
approved teacher education program has the right to due process procedures in accordance 
with Rule 290-3-2-.04, Revocation and Suspension of Certificates and Unsuitability 
Determinations. 
(e) After such time that all current employees have been fingerprinted for a 
background check, any individual who submits an application for additional certification or 
for the renewal of a certificate, and who has not completed a background check shall be 
required to be fingerprinted by the approved third party contractor designated by the Alabama 
Department of Education who has been trained to take acceptable fingerprints, submit the 
required nonrefundable and nontransferable fee, and authorize the Alabama Department of 
Public Safety to conduct a criminal history background check and allow the release of any 
criminal history information to the Alabama Department of Education.  
114 
===PAGE 17===
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.02(8)(f) 290-3-2-.02(9)(c) 
(f) A background clearance shall also be required of an applicant or current employee 
who completed a background check for certification/licensure purposes prior to July 1, 2002, 
but no longer has those prints on file due to the lapse of the certificate or license or because 
the individual was not eligible for a certificate or license. 
(g) When the Alabama State Superintendent of Education has reasonable suspicion 
that an individual who holds a certificate or license issued by the Alabama State Board of 
Education or is a current public employee has been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor 
other than a minor traffic violation or has been guilty of immoral, indecent or unbecoming 
behavior, that individual shall be subject to a background clearance through a fingerprint 
review. In such case, the individual will not be responsible for the required fee. A letter of 
notification from the Alabama State Superintendent of Education regarding the intent to 
conduct a review will be sent to the individual. The individual shall be fingerprinted by the 
approved third party contractor designated by the Alabama Department of Education who has 
been trained to take acceptable fingerprints and authorize the Alabama Department of Public 
Safety to conduct a criminal history background check and allow the release of any criminal 
history information to the Alabama Department of Education. Failure to comply with this 
requirement shall result in appropriate disciplinary action. 
(h) No local employing board or nonpublic school shall hire an applicant who may 
have unsupervised access to a child without first obtaining a criminal history background 
information check, except on a temporary emergency basis.  In the event that this exception is 
used and a position is filled by the employer due to exigent circumstances, the applicant so 
employed may be placed on payroll until such time as a criminal history background 
information check on the employee is completed as prescribed in Act 2002-457. 
(9) Alabama Educator Certification Assessment Program (AECAP). The 
statewide testing program required by the Alabama State Board of Education. 
(a) Applicants must meet the AECAP requirements in effect at the time the 
application is received in the Educator Certification Section. 
(b) Additional information regarding AECAP requirements may be found in the Rule 
for each approach as prescribed in this chapter and on the Departmental website. 
(c) Only electronic score reports submitted directly from the testing service to the 
Alabama State Department of Education will be accepted. 
115 
===PAGE 18===
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.02(9)(d) 290-3-2-.02(10)(a)10. 
(d) Components of the AECAP are: 
1. Basic skills assessments from the ACT WorkKeys System (Applied Mathematics, 
Reading for Information, and Writing). The requirements for the basic skills assessments 
became effective January 1, 2003, as a precondition for initial certification. Effective 
September 1, 2013, successful passage of the basic skills assessments became a precondition 
for unconditional admission to a Class B program or an Alternative Class A program. The 
basic skills assessments are also a precondition for selected State-approved approaches. 
Additional information regarding the basic skills assessments may be found on the 
Departmental website and on the ACT website. 
2. Praxis II tests from Educational Testing Service (ETS). The requirements for the 
Praxis II tests became effective April 14, 2005, as a precondition for initial certification in any 
teaching field or area of instructional support. Additional information regarding the Alabama 
prescribed Praxis II tests can be found on the Departmental website and on the ETS website. 
3. Effective September 1, 2018, a performance assessment. The performance 
assessment, administered by Pearson, will be required for initial certification in a teaching field 
or area of instructional support. 
(10) Professional Educational Work Experience. 
(a) Acceptable professional educational work experience is full-time employment in 
teaching or an area of instructional support (e.g., counseling, etc.) in the following educational 
settings:  
1. A state or local P-12 public school; 
2. An Alabama P-12 nonpublic school; 
3. A P-12 nonpublic school outside of Alabama that was regionally accredited or 
approved by the State Department of Education where the school was geographically located 
when the experience was earned; 
4. A P-12 church-related school; 
5. A P-12 charter school that was regionally accredited or approved by the State 
Department of Education where the school is geographically located when the experience was 
earned; 
6. State Departments of Education; 
7. An Alabama State Department of Education sponsored Initiative (e.g., Alabama 
Reading Initiative, etc.); 
8. A professional educational association (e.g., National Education Association, 
National Federation of Teachers, etc); 
9. A post-secondary institution that was regionally accredited when the professional 
educational work experience was earned. Full-time employment in a post-secondary 
institution is determined by the written policies of that institution. 
10. A P-12 federally operated school (e.g., Department of Defense Education 
Activity, Bureau of Indian Affairs, etc.); 
116 
===PAGE 19===
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.02(10)(a)11. 290-3-2-.02(11)(e) 
11. A Head Start Program under the legal jurisdiction of a public school system when 
the experience was earned; 
12. A childcare facility below Kindergarten (Age 5) if the facility was accredited by 
the National Association for the Education of Young Children (NAEYC) when the experience 
was earned. 
(b) Professional educational work experience earned outside of the United States will 
be considered on an individual basis.  
(c) Employment in increments of less than one semester (4.5 months) will not be 
considered. 
(d) Educational experience as an intern, graduate assistant, student teacher, member 
of a board of education, or in positions such as an aide, clerical worker, or substitute teacher is 
not acceptable. 
(e) Supplement EXP must be used to document professional educational work 
experience. 
(11)  Valid Periods for Certificates and Licenses.  
(a) If applicable, deadlines for meeting requirements to issue a certificate are outlined 
in the specific rule for that certification approach. 
(b) Current valid periods for Professional Educator Certificates, Professional 
Leadership Certificates, and renewable Career and Technical Certificates . Professional 
Educator Certificates, Professional Leadership Certificates, and renewable Career and 
Technical Certificates issued beginning December 2013 are valid from the date of issuance 
through the remainder of the same scholastic year, and thereafter, for the next five consecutive 
scholastic years unless otherwise prescribed elsewhere in this chapter.  
(c) Changing valid periods when a new Professional Educator Certificate , 
Professional Leadership Certificate, or renewable Career and Technical Certificate is added . 
When an additional Professional Educator Certificate, Professional Leadership Certificate, or 
renewable Career and Technical Certificate is issued, the valid period for each valid 
Professional Educator Certificate, Professional Leadership Certificate, or renewable Career 
and Technical Certificate shall be updated to reflect the valid period of the newest Professional 
Educator Certificate, Professional Leadership Certificate or renewable Career and Technical 
Certificate. 
(d) Changing valid periods when an additional teaching field is added to a 
Professional Educator Certificate. When an additional teaching field is added to a valid 
Professional Educator Certificate, the valid period for each valid Professional Educator 
Certificate, Professional Leadership Certificate, or renewable Career and Technical Certificate 
shall be updated to the valid period of the newest Professional Educator Certificate. 
(e) Additional information regarding the valid period of a certificate is in the Rule 
for the specific certificate. 
117 
===PAGE 20===
  
   
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.02(11)(f) 290-3-2-.02 History 
(f) Valid period historical information. 
1. From July 1, 1997 through November 2013, the Department issued Professional 
Educator Certificates with a valid period of five scholastic years. In January 2010, the 
Department began to issue Professional Leadership Certificates with a valid period of five 
scholastic years. 
2. Prior to July 1, 1997, a Class B Professional Educator Certificate was issued with 
a valid period of 8 scholastic years, a Class A Professional Educator Certificate was issued 
with a valid period of 10 scholastic years, and a Class AA Professional Educator Certificate 
was issued with a valid period of 12 scholastic years. 
(12) Failure to Maintain a Valid Certificate. An individual who allows a certificate 
to expire cannot qualify for a certificate at the same degree-level in the same teaching field or 
area of instructional support based on the same approach and criteria or credentials that were 
used to earn the certificate initially. Additional information on the requirements for reinstating 
an expired certificate is in Rule 290-3-2-.29. 
(13)  Foreign Credential Evaluations. 
(a)   An individual who earned a bachelor’s or higher degree at a university
 or college 
in another country must submit an evaluation of their foreign credentials from a 
Department-approved foreign credential evaluation agency.  
(b) The original complete evaluation must be submitted and must include all of the 
following: 
1. An accurate course- by-course and credit hour- by-credit hour translation of the 
coursework completed. 
2. A statement verifying the degree earned which is equivalent to a degree granted 
by a regionally accredited senior institution in the United States. 
3. The major program area. 
4. The overall grade point average (GPA). The overall GPA is the GPA posted on 
the official transcript of the degree granting institution that was used as a basis for granting the 
degree. 
(c) An individual who earned a bachelor’s or higher degree and completed an educator 
preparation program at a university or college in another country may seek a Professional 
Educator Certificate in a teaching field. Additional information may be found in 
Rule 290-3-2-.25. 
Author: Dr. Thomas R. Bice. 
Statutory Authority: Ala. Code §§16-3-11, 16-23-1 and 16-23-2 (1975). 
History: New 12-19-78, repealed 12-8-94, effective 12-31 -96; new adopted 12-8-94, effective 1-1-97, repealed 11- 14-96 
and amended repealed date of original chapter to 6-30-97 new adopted 1-9-97 effective 7-1-97; amended: 6-14 -99; effective 
7-19-99, repealed and new adopted 06-13 -02; emergency Rule to appeal and adopt new filed on 6- 13-02; new adopted 8-8 -
02, effective 9-12-02; emergency Rule to appeal and adopt new filed on 10-10-02; new adopted 12-12-02, effective 1-16-03; 
repealed and new adopted 09-11 -03 effective 10-16-03; emergency amended Rule adopted 4-14 -05, effective 4-14-05; 
amended Rule adopted 6-9-05, effective 7-14-05; amended 8-7-06, effective 9-11-06; repealed and adopted new, 8-4-08, 
effective 9-18-08; repealed and adopted new 12-9-10, effective 1- 14-11; emergency Rule to amend filed 1-10-13; amended 
Rule adopted 3- 14-13, effective 4-18 -13; emergency Rule to repeal filed 11-14 -13; repealed and adopted new 1-17-14, 
effective 2-21-14; repealed and adopted new 3-10-16, effective 4-24-16. 
118 
===PAGE 21===
  
      
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.03 290-3-2-.03(2) Footnote “f” 
290-3-2-.03 Professional Educator Certificate and Professional Leadership Certificate. 
(1) General Information.  
(a) A Professional Educator Certificate is renewable and may be issued at the Class 
B, Class A, or Class AA level.  
(b) A Professional Leadership Certificate is renewable and may be issued at the Class 
A or Class AA level. 
(c) An individual may be eligible for a Professional Educator Certificate o r 
Professional Leadership Certificate through a State-approved approach as prescribed in this 
chapter. 
(2) Class B, Class A, or Class AA Professional Educator Certificate for Teaching 
Fields. 
Certificate Grade or Age 
Levels 
Class B Class A Class AA 
Collaborative Special Education K-6 a, b a, d a, e 
Collaborative Special Education 6-12 a, b a, d a, e 
Early Childhood Special Education P-3 a, b a, d a, e 
Early Childhood P-3 a, b a, d a, e 
Elementary K-6 a, b a, d a, e 
Elementary-Secondary P-12 a, b, c a, c, d a, c, e 
Middle Level 4-8 a, b, c a, c, d a, c, e 
Secondary 6-12 a, b, c a, c, d a, c, e 
Special Education P-12 a, b, c, f a, c, d a, c, e 
a 
Meet all requirements for the Professional Educator Certificate as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.02 and 
as prescribed in the Rule specific to each applicable approach in this chapter. 
b 
Hold at least an earned bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited senior institution or have met 
requirements as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.02(7). 
c 
Be issued only in teaching fields listed in the current edition of the Subject and Personnel Codes of the 
Alabama State Department of Education. 
d 
Hold at least an earned master's degree from a regionally accredited senior institution. 
e 
Complete a planned sixth-year program at a regionally accredited senior institution. Program 
completion may result in an education specialist or higher degree. 
f 
Initial Class B Professional Educator Certificates in speech and language impaired have not been issued 
with a valid period beginning after July 1, 2007. Information about the Speech-Language Pathology Assistant 
Certificate is in Rule 290-3-2-.30. 
119 
===PAGE 22===
  
   
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.03(3) 290-3-2-.03(3) Footnote “i” 
(3) Class A or Class AA Professional Educator Certificate or Professional 
Leadership Certificate for Areas of Instructional Support Other Than Instructional 
Leader. 
Certificate Grade Levels Class A Class AA 
Educational Administrator P-12 a, b, d, e, g a, c, d, e, g 
Principal P-6 a, b, d, e, g a, c, d, e, g 
Principal 7-12 a, b, d, e, g a, c, d, e, g 
Principal P-12 a, b, d, e, g a, c, d, e, g 
Library Media Specialist P-12 a, b, f, h a, c, f, h 
School Counselor P-12 a, b, f, h a, c, f, h 
School Psychologist P-12 a, b, f, h a, c, f, h 
School Psychometrist P-12 a, b, f, h a, c, f, h 
Speech-Language Pathologist P-12 a, b, h, i a, c, h, i 
Sport Manager P-12 a, b, f, h a, c, f, h 
Superintendent P-12 a, b, d, e, g a, c, d, e, g 
Supervisor P-12 a, b, d, e, g a, c, d, e, g 
Career and Technical Administrator 6-12 a, b, d, e, g a, c, d, e, g 
a 
Meet all requirements for the Professional Educator Certificate or the Professional Leadership 
Certificate as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.02 and as prescribed in the Rule specific to each applicable approach 
in this chapter. 
b 
Hold at least an earned master’s degree from a regionally accredited senior institution. 
c 
Complete a planned sixth-year program at a regionally accredited senior institution. Program 
completion may result in an education specialist or higher degree. 
d 
Meet requirements for certification in career and technical administrator, educational administrator, 
principal, superintendent, or supervisor only through the certificate issued by another state approach. 
e 
Applicants for certification in career and technical administrator, educational administrator, principal, 
superintendent, or supervision through the certificate issued by another state approach must verify three full years 
of full-time professional educational work experience in a P-12 school system(s) which must include at least one 
full year of full-time classroom teaching experience. 
fApplicants for certification in library media, school counseling, school psychology, school 
psychometry, and sport management must verify two full years of full-time, professional educational work 
experience in a P-12 school system(s), except for those seeking certification through the Council for Accreditation 
of Counseling and Related Educational Programs (CACREP) approach or the Nationally Certified School 
Psychologist approach. 
gMeeting requirements for certification in career and technical administrator, educational administrator, 
principal, superintendent, and supervisor leads to the issuance of the Professional Leadership Certificate. 
hMeeting requirements for certification in library media, school counselor, school psychologist, school 
psychometrist, speech-language pathologist, and sport manager leads to the issuance of the Professional Educator 
Certificate. 
iMeet requirements for certification in speech-language pathology only through the Speech-Language 
Pathology approach. 
120 
===PAGE 23===
         
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.03(4) 290-3-2-.03 History 
(4) Class A or Class AA Professional Leadership Certificate in Instructional 
Leader. 
Certificate Grade Level Class A Class AA 
Instructional Leader P-12 a, b a, c 
a 
Meet all requirements for the Professional Leadership Certificate as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.02 and 
as prescribed in the Rule for the State-approved program approach. 
b 
Hold at least an earned master’s degree from a regionally accredited senior institution. 
c 
Complete a planned sixth-year program at a regionally accredited senior institution. Program 
completion may result in an education specialist or higher degree. 
(5) Valid Period. The valid period of the Professional Educator Certificate shall be 
from the date of issuance through the remainder of the same scholastic year, and thereafter, for 
the next five consecutive scholastic years. The valid period of the Professional Leadership 
Certificate shall be from the date of issuance through the remainder of the same scholastic year, 
and thereafter, for the next five consecutive scholastic years.  
Author: Dr. Thomas R. Bice. 
Statutory Authority: Ala. Const. Amend. 284, Ala. Code §§16-3-11, 16-23-1 and 16-23-2 (1975). 
History: New 12-19 -78, repealed 12-8-94, effective 12-31-96; new adopted 12-8-94, effective 1-1-97, repealed 
11-14-96 and amended repealed date of original chapter to 6- 30-97 new adopted 1-9-97 effective 7-1-97; amended: 
6- 14-99; effective 7-19-99, repealed and new adopted 06- 13-02; emergency Rule to repeal and adopt new filed on 
6-13-02; new adopted 8-8-02, effective 9-12-02; emergency Rule to repeal and adopt new filed on 10- 10-02; new adopted 
12-12-02, effective 1-16-03; amended 07-13 -04 effective 08-17-04; emergency Rule adopted 9-14 -06, effective 9-14-06; 
amended 11-9-06, effective 12-14-06; repealed and adopted new, 8-4-08, effective 9-18-08; amended 4-8-10, effective 5-13-
10; repealed and adopted new 12-9-10, effective 1-14-11; emergency Rule to repeal filed 11-14-13; repealed and adopted new 
1-17-14, effective 2-21-14; repealed and adopted new 3-10-16, effective 4-24-16. 
121 
===PAGE 24===
    
  
     
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.04 290-3-2-.04(1)(e) 
290-3-2-.04 Revocation and Suspension of Certificates and Unsuitability 
Determinations. 
(1) Authority of the Alabama State Superintendent of Education. 
(a) The Alabama State Superintendent of Education shall have the authority under 
existing legal standards to: 
1. Revoke, suspend, recall, non-renew, refuse to issue, or impose any other 
condition or requirement authorized by this Rule upon any certificate held by a person who 
has been proven guilty of immoral conduct or unbecoming or indecent behavior in Alabama 
or any other  location in accordance with Ala. Code §16-23-5 (1975). 
2. Revoke, suspend, recall, non-renew, refuse to issue, or impose any other 
condition or requirement authorized by this Rule upon a certificate to an applicant whose 
certificate has been subject to adverse action by another state until after the adverse action is 
resolved in his or her favor, or reversed by that state. 
3. Suspend or revoke an individual’s certificate issued by the Alabama State 
Superintendent of Education when a certificate or license issued by another state is subject to 
adverse action. The suspension or revocation shall expire upon reinstatement of the certificate 
or license without other conditions by the other state.  
4. Revoke, refuse to issue, suspend, recall, non-renew, or impose any other 
condition or requirement authorized by this Rule upon a certificate for just cause. 
5. Revoke, refuse to issue, suspend, recall, non-renew, or impose any other 
condition or requirement authorized by this Rule, any certificate where there has been an 
alteration of the certificate by any certificate holder or by any other person or agency with 
intent to mislead or defraud. It shall be incumbent upon the certificate holder to establish 
evidence of the absence of intent to mislead or defraud. 
6. Issue a public reprimand; place a certificate holder on probation; require a 
person to undergo drug testing, training in anger management, classroom management, or 
student assessment procedures; or require any other appropriate or remedial training as a 
condition of his or her certification or licensure. 
7. Issue an emergency suspension of a certificate or license using the procedures 
established by the Alabama Administrative Procedure Act. 
(b) This Rule shall apply to individuals holding a Substitute Teacher License, or 
any other certificate or license issued pursuant to Title 16 of the Code of Alabama. 
(c) This Rule shall apply to individuals applying for admission to a State-approved 
teacher education program. 
(d) The Alabama State Superintendent of Education shall determine whether the 
applicant satisfies the criteria for public employment pursuant to the Alabama Child Protection 
Act of 1999, as amended, and Ala. Code §16-23-5 (1975), as applicable.  
(e) The Alabama State Superintendent of Education’s decision to revoke, recall, 
non-renew, non-issue, deny, accept a surrender of a certificate, or other similar action is a 
permanent decision concerning the individual’s fitness to teach and suitability for public 
employment.  
122 
===PAGE 25===
        
  
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.04(2) 290-3-2-.04(3)(f) 
(2) Requirements of Local Superintendents of Education. Each local 
superintendent shall submit to the Alabama State Superintendent of Education within ten 
calendar days of the decision, the name and social security number of each employee holding 
an Alabama certificate or license who is terminated, or nonrenewed, resigns, or is placed on 
administrative leave for cause, and shall indicate the reason for such action. Superintendents 
shall provide personnel records and all investigative information immediately upon request by 
the Alabama Department of Education. Superintendents shall not be required to report teachers 
who are nonrenewed without cause. Failure to comply may result in disciplinary action against 
the employing local superintendent. 
(3) Certification and Unsuitability Status Review Process. 
(a) When information is received pursuant to a criminal background check 
conducted under the Child Protection Act of 1999, as amended, for an individual who has been 
convicted of or entered a plea of no contest to a felony or misdemeanor other than a minor 
traffic violation, or has a pending charge against him or her, a confidential review of the 
individual's suitability status shall be conducted to determine whether or not to recommend 
action. 
(b) When information is received by any method other than directly pursuant to a 
criminal background check conducted under the Child Protection Act of 1999, as amended, for 
an individual who appears to have been guilty of immoral, unbecoming, or indecent behavior, 
a
 confidential review of the individual’s fitness to hold a certificate or license shall be 
conducted to determine whether or not to recommend action. 
(c) All reviews shall be thorough and concluded as expeditiously as possible.  
Information discovered in the course of the review not relevant to the question of certification 
or suitability for employment shall be disregarded. All documents shall be deemed 
investigatory documents and remain confidential during the course of the review. 
(d) Until notice of a proposed action is attempted to be served upon an individual, 
the State Department of Education shall indicate in all databases accessible by third parties, 
including local education agencies, that an individual’s valid certificate is valid. During this 
period, the State Department of Education shall state to third parties inquiring about the valid 
certificate holder’s status, that the individual’s certificate is valid . Nothing in this Rule shall 
be construed to impede the State Department of Education from investigating claims of 
misconduct, including contacting potential witnesses, to determine whether to initiate any 
action against the certificate holder or other potential respondent. 
(e) Upon completion of the confidential review, a recommendation for action or no 
action shall be conveyed to the Alabama State Superintendent of Education and the process 
prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.04(4) through (8) shall apply as appropriate.  
(f) When an individual has been convicted of any crime covered by the Fincher 
Act, codified at §16-23-5, Ala. Code (1975), the procedures in this Rule need not be followed; 
instead, immediate action may be taken pursuant to the provisions of that section. 
123 
===PAGE 26===
        
     
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.04(4) 290-3-2-.04(4)(c)3. 
(4) Hearing Procedures. 
(a) Notice of Proposed Action or Unsuitability. A proposed action against an 
individual’s certificate or license  or notice of unsuitability shall be initiated by service of a 
written notice of the proposed action or unsuitability, and shall contain a statement of: 
1. The nature of the hearing including the individual’s rights to challenge the 
proposal pursuant to the Alabama Administrative Procedures Act; 
2. The legal authority and jurisdiction under which the hearing is to be held; 
3. Reference to the particular sections of statutes and Rules involved; and 
4. The reasons for the proposed action. If the Alabama State Department of 
Education is unable to state the reasons in detail at the time the notice is served, the initial 
notice may be limited to a statement of the issues involved. Thereafter, upon application by 
the respondent, a more definite statement may be furnished. 
(b) Service of Notice. The notice may be served by personal service or certified 
mail, return receipt requested. 
(c) Request for Hearing.  A respondent may request in writing a hearing to contest 
a proposed action. 
1. The request shall be submitted to the Alabama State Superintendent of 
Education within 15 calendar days of the date of receipt of notice of the proposed action. 
2. Failure to request a hearing within the above time frame shall constitute a 
waiver of the opportunity for a hearing and shall cause the matter to be submitted to the 
Alabama State Superintendent of Education for final action. 
3. If a hearing is requested within the above time frame, the Alabama State 
Superintendent of Education may request the appointment of a hearing officer to conduct the 
hearing. If the respondent is a current public noncertified employee, the due process 
administrative hearing shall be conducted by an administrative law judge in accordance with 
the hearing procedures of the Alabama Administrative Procedures Act; and the administrative 
law judge shall hear the case, make findings of fact, and enter the final determination of 
suitability. Within a reasonable amount of time prior to the hearing, both parties shall exchange 
all documents to be introduced into evidence at the hearing. The service of materials 
exchanged by the parties, and of any filings with the administrative law judge, may be by 
electronic means, including e-mail. Any filing e-mailed to an administrative law judge shall 
be simultaneously e-mailed to the opposing party or his or her attorney. E-mailed documents 
should be in PDF format. When service on an opposing party or his or her attorney is not made 
by e-mail, any e-mailed filing shall be placed in the U.S. Mail to the opposing party or his or 
her attorney within one business day.  The Alabama Rules of Civil Procedure shall be a guide 
to the conduct of discovery by the parties. 
124 
===PAGE 27===
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.04(4)(d) 290-3-2-.04(4)(g)1.(vi) 
(d) Conduct of Hearing. 
1. A hearing officer shall have the authority to: 
(i) Establish a date, time and place for the hearing; 
(ii) Maintain order; 
(iii) Make a record of the proceedings; 
(iv) Establish reasonable time limits for the conduct of the proceedings; 
(v) Rule on the admissibility of evidence; 
(vi) Hold a prehearing conference, if necessary, to clarify the matters in dispute; 
establish the order of presentation; allow and establish time limits for the exchange of exhibits 
and names of witnesses; and 
(vii) Enter an order on any other matter which would affect the conduct of the 
hearing. 
2. The hearing shall be open to the public, unless it is ordered to be closed by the 
hearing officer for good cause or by agreement of the parties. 
3. A respondent may be represented by counsel at his/her own expense. 
4. The hearing officer shall enter a protective order sealing any portion of the 
record and documents exchanged by the parties when that information contains personally 
identifiable information about one or more students, and when the public has no need for that 
information. 
(e) Settlement. Informal dispositions may be made of any matter set for hearing 
by stipulation, agreed settlement, consent order or default or by another method agreed upon 
by the parties in writing. 
(f) Pending final resolution of the hearing: 
1. The Alabama State Superintendent of Education may take no further action 
regarding the suitability or fitness determination, except for an emergency suspension; 
2. The suitability or fitness determination regarding the public certified employee, 
certified applicant for employment, or current public noncertified employee is stayed, except 
for an emergency suspension; 
3. The requesting local employing board is prohibited from taking any adverse 
action against the individual that pertains solely to the pending procedures of the Alabama 
State Department of Education. 
(g) Record of Proceedings. 
1. The record of a hearing shall include: 
(i) The notice of proposed action; 
(ii) The request for a hearing; 
(iii) All evidence received during the hearing; 
(iv) A transcript of the proceedings; 
(v) A statement of all matters officially noticed; 
(vi) All questions and offers of proof, objections and rulings thereon; 
125 
===PAGE 28===
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.04(4)(g)1.(vii) 290-3-2-.04(4)(j) 
(vii) The written recommendation of the hearing officer; and 
(viii) The final order of the Alabama State Superintendent of Education (if the 
individual is certified or an applicant for certification); or 
(ix) The final order by an administrative law judge (if the individual is a noncertified 
current employee). 
2. Oral proceedings shall be recorded either by mechanized means or by a 
qualified shorthand reporter.  Oral proceedings shall be transcribed at the request of any party 
with the expense of transcription charged to the requesting party. The record of oral 
proceedings shall be maintained by the Alabama State Department of Education for five years 
from the date of entry of the final order of the Alabama State Superintendent of Education. 
(h) Rules of Evidence. The Alabama Rules of Evidence as provided in Ala. Code 
§41-22-13 (1975) shall apply to all hearings conducted under these Rules.  When necessary to 
ascertain facts not reasonably susceptible of proof under the Alabama Rules of Evidence, 
evidence not admissible thereunder may be admitted (except where precluded by statute) if it 
is of a type commonly relied upon by reasonably prudent persons in the conduct of their affairs. 
(i) Final Order: 
1. Upon completion of a hearing, the hearing officer shall prepare for and submit 
to the Alabama State Superintendent of Education a written recommendation with respect to 
the proposed action.  The hearing officer may, if he or she disagrees with the proposed action, 
make any recommendation that he or she finds is warranted under this Rule and state law. The 
recommendation may be for a less severe sanction than the action that was proposed by the 
Department. The recommendation shall consist of a statement of facts found by the hearing 
officer and a recitation of the application of the facts found to the applicable statutes and 
regulations. The recommendation along with the record shall be submitted to the Alabama 
State Superintendent of Education within 30 days after the hearing is concluded. The 30-day 
period may be extended at the discretion of the hearing officer. 
2. Based upon a review of the record of the hearing and the recommendation of 
the hearing officer, the Alabama State Superintendent of Education shall issue a final order 
within 30 days after the recommendation is received for individuals who are certified or who 
are applicants for certification. 
(i) The 30-day period may be waived or extended with the consent of the parties. 
(ii) The final order may accept, reject, or modify the recommendation of the hearing 
officer for individuals who are certified or licensed or who are applicants for certification or 
licensure. 
(iii) The decision of the administrative law judge for cases involving noncertified 
current employees is final and not subject to appeal. 
(j) Upon final resolution the results of the hearing and any accompanying findings 
or order are sent to both the individual and the local employing superintendent. 
126 
===PAGE 29===
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.04(5) 290-3-2-.04 History 
(5) Application for Rehearing. Any party may, within 15 days after entry of the 
final order, file an application for rehearing pursuant to the provisions of Ala. Code §41-22-17 
(1975). 
(6) Summary Proceeding. 
(a) If, after a reasonable and diligent effort, service of notice of a proposed action 
is not perfected, the Alabama State Superintendent of Education may make a summary 
disposition of the matters reflected in the notice of proposed action. 
(b) The Alabama State Superintendent of Education may suspend a current teacher 
certificate/license, refuse to renew a teacher certificate/license, or refuse to issue a teacher 
certificate/license either indefinitely or until the expiration of the valid period of the teacher 
certificate/license, as the case may be, until such time as the whereabouts of the teacher 
becomes known. At such time, the Alabama State Superintendent of Education may serve the 
respondent with a notice of proposed action. 
(7) Judicial Review. A teacher who has exhausted all administrative remedies 
available and who is aggrieved by a final order of the Alabama State Superintendent of 
Education may seek judicial review pursuant to the provisions of Ala. Code §§41-22-20 and 
41-22-21 (1975). 
(8) Report of Final Dispositions. Upon final order of the Alabama State 
Superintendent of Education to revoke, recall, suspend, refuse to issue a certificate or license, 
or imposing any other sanction authorized by this Rule or by settlement, the Alabama State 
Department of Education shall report the final disposition to the National Association of State 
Directors of Teacher Education and Certification (NASDTEC) Clearinghouse or its agent, in 
a manner consistent with the requirements of the NASDTEC compact. 
Author: Dr. Thomas R. Bice 
Statutory Authority: Ala. Const. Amend. 284, Ala. Code §§16-3-11, 16-23-1, 16-23-2, and 16-23-5 (1975). 
History: Adopted new 8-4-08, effective 9-8-08; repealed and adopted new 12-9-10, effective 1-14-11; repealed and adopted 
new 3-10-16, effective 4-24-16. 
127 
===PAGE 30===
SUPP. NO. 16-1             EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.05 290-3-2-.05(4)(c)1. 
290-3-2-.05 Additional Teaching Field Approach Based on a Professional Educator 
Certificate, Experience, and a Test Score. 
(1) Overview. An individual may seek additional certification in the selected teaching 
field(s) of early childhood education (P-3), elementary education (K-6), and most middle level 
(4-8), secondary (6-12), and elementary-secondary (P-12) teaching fields if a valid Alabama 
Professional Educator Certificate in a teaching field is held, appropriate experience is verified, 
and the appropriate Alabama prescribed Praxis II subject area test(s) is passed. This approach 
is commonly referred to as Certification Based on Test (CBT). 
(2) Limitations on Issuance. 
(a) This approach is not available to an individual who holds only a valid 
Professional Educator Certificate in an area of instructional support or a Professional 
Leadership Certificate. 
(b) This approach is not available to an individual who holds only a Provisional 
Certificate, Interim Employment Certificate, Business and Industry to Educational 
Administrator Certificate, Career and Technical (Level, Type, Specialty Area, Degree 
Equivalent, and/or Temporary) Certificate, Speech-Language Pathology Assistant Certificate, 
Speech-Language Pathology Temporary Certificate, Speech-Language Pathology Professional 
Educator Certificate, Child Nutrition Program Director Certificate, Junior Reserve Officer 
Training Corps (JROTC) Certificate, Emergency Certificate, or Substitute License.   
(c) Certification through this approach in the teaching fields of early childhood 
education (P-3) and elementary education (K-6) is only available to an individual who holds a 
valid Professional Educator Certificate in one of the following teaching fields: early childhood 
education (P-3), elementary education (K-6 or K-9), early childhood special education (P-3), 
collaborative teacher (K-6), or elementary multiple abilities (K-6). 
(d) Additional certification is available only in the teaching fields and grade levels 
listed on the current application for this approach. 
(3) Application. The applicant is required to submit to the Educator Certification 
Section the current application for this approach and documentation of having met all 
requirements as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.05 and on the application. 
(4) Requirements. All requirements must be successfully completed prior to the 
date the application is received in the Educator Certification Section. 
(a) Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
(b) A valid Professional Educator Certificate in a teaching field as prescribed in 
Rules 290-3-2-.03 and 290-3-2-.05(2). 
(c) Experience Requirement. 
1. Teaching fields of early childhood (P-3) and elementary education (K-6): 
Verification of two full scholastic years of full-time classroom teaching experience within the 
grade range of the new certificate being sought. Partial years cannot be combined to meet this 
requirement. Experience must be verified on Supplement EXP.  
128 
===PAGE 31===
 
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.05(4)(c)2. 290-3-2-.05 History 
2. Other teaching fields: Verification of two full scholastic years of full-time 
classroom teaching experience within a P-12 setting. Partial years cannot be combined to meet 
this requirement. Experience must be verified on Supplement EXP.  
(d)  Verification of a current passing score for the prescribed Praxis II subject area 
test(s) of the Alabama Educator Certification Assessment Program (AECAP) for the teaching 
field. 
(5) Degree Level. The Professional Educator Certificate issued through this 
approach shall be issued only at the Class B (bachelor’s degree) level. 
(6) Valid Period. The valid period of the certificate shall be from the date of 
issuance through the remainder of the same scholastic year, and thereafter, for the next five 
consecutive scholastic years.  
(7) Historical Information. The Additional Teaching Field approach became 
effective on April 14, 2006, upon adoption and implementation of the prescribed Praxis II 
subject area test(s). 
Author: Dr. Thomas R. Bice. 
Statutory Authority: Ala. Const. Amend. 284, Ala. Code §§16-3-11, 16-23-1 and 16-23-2 (1975). 
History: New 12-19-78, repealed 12-8-94, effective 12-31-96; new adopted 12-8-94, effective 1-1-97, repealed 11-14-96 and 
amended repealed date of original chapter to 6-30 -97 new adopted 1-9-97 effective 7-1-97; amended: 6-14 -99; effective 7-
19-99, repealed and new adopted 06-13-02; emergency Rule to appeal and adopt new filed on 6-13-02; new adopted 8-8-02, 
effective 9-12-02; emergency Rule to appeal and adopt new filed on 10-10 -02; new adopted 12-12 -02, effective 1-16-03; 
repealed and adopted new, 8-4-08, effective 9-18-08; repealed and adopted new 12-9-10, effective 1-14 -11; emergency Rule 
to repeal filed 11-14-13; repealed and adopted new 1-17- 14, effective 2-21-14; repealed and adopted new 3-10-16, effective 
4-24-16. 
129 
===PAGE 32===
   
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.06 290-3-2-.06(2)(d)4. 
290-3-2-.06 Provisional Certificate in a Teaching Field (PCTF) Approach. 
(1) Overview. A superintendent or administrator who wishes to employ an 
individual may request a Provisional Certificate in a Teaching Field (PCTF). The individual 
must be employed full-time in a teaching field while completing the requirements of the PCTF 
approach to earn a Class B Professional Educator Certificate in that teaching field. A PCTF is 
available for grades K-12 and 6-12 teaching fields as indicated on the current application form. 
This approach was previously named the Alternative Baccalaureate-Level Certificate (ABC) 
Approach. 
(2) General Information. 
(a) An individual must complete three full years of full-time teaching experience 
in the teaching field while holding a valid PCTF and/or ABC in no more than two public school 
systems and/or nonpublic schools within the four scholastic years from the July 1 beginning 
date of the first PCTF or ABC. 
(b) An individual must hold a valid certificate for all teaching fields to which he or 
she is assigned. An individual who holds only a valid PCTF must be assigned only to the 
teaching field for which the PCTF was issued. An individual who holds a valid PCTF and a 
valid certificate in another teaching field or area of instructional support must be assigned to 
the area of the PCTF for at least the majority of the day. 
(c) The superintendent or administrator must monitor the applicant’s compliance 
with the requirements of the PCTF approach.  
(d) An individual who held the first Alternative Baccalaureate-Level Certificate 
(ABC) valid for the 2013-2014, 2014-2015, or 2015-2016 scholastic year may be issued the 
second and/or third PCTF in the same teaching field if all requirements have been met.  
1. An individual who held the first ABC valid for the 2013-2014 scholastic year 
and the second ABC valid for the 2014-2015 or the 2015-2016 scholastic year may be issued 
the third PCTF valid for the 2016-2017 scholastic year. 
2. An individual who held the first ABC valid for the 2014-2015 scholastic year 
and the second ABC valid for the 2015-2016 scholastic year may be issued the third PCTF 
valid for the 2016-2017 or 2017-2018 scholastic year. 
3. An individual who held the first ABC valid for the 2014-2015 scholastic year 
may be issued the second PCTF valid for the 2016-2017 scholastic year and the third PCTF 
valid for the 2017-2018 scholastic year. 
4. An individual who held the first ABC valid for the 2015-2016 scholastic year 
may be issued the second PCTF valid for the 2016-2017 or 2017-2018 scholastic year and the 
third PCTF valid for the 2017-2018 or 2018-2019 scholastic year. 
130 
===PAGE 33===
SUPP. NO. 16-1 
290-3-2-.06(3) 
EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.06(4)(f) 
(3) 
Certificates. 
Grade Levels, Teaching Fields, and Resulting Professional Educator 
PCTF Grade Levels K-12 6-12 
PCTF Teaching Fields a, b a, c 
Resulting Baccalaureate-Level 
Professional Educator 
Certificate 
d e 
aFirst, second, and third PCTFs and/or ABCs must be issued in the same teaching field. 
bLimited to choral or instrumental music, dance, languages other than English (as listed on the current application 
for this approach), theatre, and visual arts. 
cLimited to the 6-12 teaching fields as listed on the current application for this approach. 
dClass B Elementary-Secondary Professional Educator Certificate (Grades P-12). 
eClass B Secondary Professional Educator Certificate (Grades 6-12). 
(4) Limitations on Issuance. 
(a) An individual who has earned credit in more than five professional education 
courses prior to seeking alternative certification through the PCTF approach may not be 
eligible for a first PCTF, to be determined on an individual basis. An individual who holds an 
Alabama Professional Educator Certificate or a professional educator certificate issued by 
another state may be exempt from this five course limit.  
(b) The Department may refuse to issue a certificate for an individual who was 
enrolled in, but did not meet the requirements of, an educator preparation program. 
(c) An individual may not be employed for more than three scholastic years on the 
basis of holding an Alternative Baccalaureate-Level Certificate, a Career and Technical 
Alternative Baccalaureate-Level Certificate, a Preliminary Certificate, a Preliminary 
Certificate Through Exception, a Special Alternative Certificate, a Provisional Certificate, an 
Interim Employment Certificate, a Business and Industry to Educational Administrator 
Certificate, an alternative-approach certificate issued by another state or issuing authority, or 
any combination thereof. 
(d) A PCTF is only valid for employment with the public school system or 
nonpublic school to which the PCTF was issued. 
(e) An individual who has not completed all requirements for the Class B 
Professional Educator Certificate through this approach by the expiration date of the third 
PCTF shall no longer be eligible for certification through the PCTF approach or any alternative 
certificate approach. 
(f) An individual who earns a Professional Educator Certificate or a Professional 
Leadership Certificate in the area for which the alternative certificates were issued may be 
eligible to follow an alternative approach to earning a Professional Educator Certificate or 
Professional Leadership Certificate  in another area. 
131 
===PAGE 34===
     
    
        
        
      
             
SUPP. NO. 16-1                   EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.06(5) 290-3-2-.06(5)(b)4. 
(5) First PCTF. 
(a) Application. 
1. The applicant is required to submit to the superintendent or administrator the 
current application for this approach and documentation of having met all requirements as 
prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.06 and on the application. 
2. The superintendent or administrator who wishes to employ the applicant to 
teach full-time, except as noted in Rule 290-3-2-.06(2)(b), in the teaching field and at the grade 
level for which the PCTF is to be issued is required to submit to the Educator Certification 
Section: 
(i) A recommendation on the current application for this approach no later than 
October 1 of the scholastic year for which the PCTF is requested. 
(ii) The applicant’s current application and documentation of having met all 
requirements. 
(b) Requirements. All requirements must be successfully completed prior to 
October 1 of the scholastic year for which the first PCTF is requested. 
1. Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
2. Verification on an official transcript of at least an earned bachelor's degree from 
a regionally accredited senior institution. Verification on an official transcript of an earned 
master’s or higher degree from a regionally accredited senior institution may also meet the 
degree requirement. 
(i) The bachelor’s degree must be posted with a minimum overall grade point 
average (GPA) of at least 2.5 or the master’s or higher degree must be posted with a minimum 
overall GPA of at least 3.0. For issuance of the first PCTF with a valid period beginning 
July 1, 2017, and thereafter, the bachelor’s degree must be posted with a minimum 
overall GPA of at least 2.75 or the master’s or higher degree must be posted with a 
minimum overall GPA of at least 3.0. The overall GPA is the GPA posted on the official 
transcript of the degree granting institution that was used as the basis for granting the degree. 
(ii) The GPA requirement does not apply to an applicant holding a valid 
Professional Educator Certificate or Professional Leadership Certificate. 
3. Verification of current passing scores for the basic skills assessments of the 
Alabama Educator Certification Assessment Program (AECAP). This requirement does not 
apply to an applicant holding a valid Professional Educator Certificate or Professional 
Leadership Certificate.  Additional information is in Rule 290-3-2-.02(9). 
4. For teaching fields listed on the current application for this approach in which 
a Praxis II subject area test(s) is currently adopted and prescribed, verification of a current 
passing score on the prescribed Praxis II subject area test(s) of the AECAP. Additional 
information is in Rule 290-3-2-.02(9). 
132 
===PAGE 35===
     
--
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.06(5)(b)5. 290-3-2-.06(6)(b)3. 
5. For teaching fields listed on the current application for this approach in which 
no Praxis II subject area test(s) is currently adopted and prescribed, verification that one of the 
following two options has been met: 
(i) Verification on an official transcript from a regionally accredited senior 
institution of an academic major in the teaching field. 
(ii) Verification on official transcript(s) from a regionally accredited institution of 
at least 32 semester hours of earned credit, including at least 19 semester hours of upper-
division credit, appropriate to the teaching field. 
6. An assigned mentor as required in Rule 290-3-2-.01(29). 
(6) Second PCTF. 
(a) Application. 
1. The applicant is required to submit to the superintendent or administrator the 
current application for this approach and documentation of having met all requirements as 
prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.06 and on the application. 
2. The superintendent or administrator who wishes to employ the applicant to 
teach full-time, except as noted in Rule 290-3-2-.06(2)(b), in the teaching field and at the grade 
level for which the PCTF is to be issued is required to submit to the Educator Certification 
Section: 
(i) A recommendation on the current application for this approach no later than 
October 1 of the scholastic year for which the PCTF is requested. 
(ii) The applicant’s current application and documentation of having met all 
requirements. 
(b) Requirements. All requirements must be successfully completed prior to 
October 1 of the scholastic year for which the second PCTF is requested. 
1. Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
2. Verification on Supplement EXP of a full year of full-time classroom teaching 
experience: 
(i) In the teaching field and at the grade level for which the first PCTF was issued, 
while holding the first PCTF, except as noted in Rule 290-3-2-.06(2)(b); or 
(ii) In the teaching field and at the grade level for which the first ABC was issued, 
while holding the first ABC valid for the 2014-2015 or 2015-2016 scholastic year, except as 
noted in Rule 290-3-2-.11(1)(e) of Supplement Number 10-4 of the Educator Certification 
Chapter of the Alabama Administrative Code. 
3. Verification on an official transcript(s) of credit earned for at least two of the 
four courses as required in Rule 290-3-2-.06(8) and on the current application for this 
approach. If an applicant holds a valid Professional Educator Certificate in a teaching 
field, the methods of teaching in the teaching field and at the grade levels for which 
certification is sought is the only course required for issuance of the second PCTF. 
4. An assigned mentor as required in Rule 290-3-2-.01(29). 
133 
===PAGE 36===
     
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.06(7) 290-3-2-.06(7)(b)5. 
(7) Third PCTF. 
(a) Application. 
1. The applicant is required to submit to the superintendent or administrator the 
current application for this approach and documentation of having met all requirements as 
prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.06 and on the application. 
2. The superintendent or administrator who wishes to employ the applicant to 
teach full-time, except as noted in Rule 290-3-2-.06(2)(b), in the teaching field and at the grade 
level for which the PCTF is to be issued is required to submit to the Educator Certification 
Section: 
(i) A recommendation on the current application for this approach no later than 
October 1 of the scholastic year for which the PCTF is requested. 
(ii) The applicant’s current application and documentation of having met all 
requirements. 
(b) Requirements. All requirements must be successfully completed prior to 
October 1 of the scholastic year for which the third PCTF is requested. 
1. Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
2. Verification on Supplement EXP of a full year of full-time classroom teaching 
experience: 
(i) In the teaching field and at the grade level for which the second PCTF was 
issued, while holding the second PCTF, except as noted in Rule 290-3-2-.06(2)(b); or 
(ii) In the teaching field and at the grade level for which the second ABC was 
issued, while holding the second ABC valid for the 2014-2015 or 2015-2016 scholastic year, 
except as noted in Rule 290-3-2-.11(1)(e) of Supplement Number 10-4 of the Educator 
Certification Chapter of the Alabama Administrative Code. 
3. Verification on an official transcript(s) of credit earned for the remaining two 
of the four courses as required in Rule 290-3-2-.06(8) and on the current application for this 
approach. If an applicant holds a valid Professional Educator Certificate in a teaching 
field, the methods of teaching in the teaching field and at the grade levels for which 
certification is sought is the only course required for issuance of the third PCTF. 
4. Verification of a current passing score attained on the prescribed Praxis II 
Principles of Learning and Teaching Test (PLT) of the Alabama Educator Certification 
Assessment Program (AECAP). This requirement does not apply to an applicant holding a 
valid Professional Educator Certificate or a valid Professional Leadership Certificate.  
Additional information is in Rule 290-3-2-.02(9). 
5. An assigned mentor as required in Rule 290-3-2-.01(29). 
134 
===PAGE 37===
  
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.06(8) 290-3-2-.06 History 
(8) Course Requirements.  An applicant pursuing certification through the PCTF 
approach must earn credit for the required coursework prior to October 1 of the scholastic year 
for which the second and third PCTFs are to be issued. 
(a) Coursework must be completed at an Alabama regionally accredited senior 
institution with State-approved programs and include each of the following areas: 
1. Classroom management; 
2. Evaluation of teaching and learning; 
3. Methods of teaching in the teaching field and at the grade levels for which 
certification is sought; and 
4. Strategies for teaching special needs students in inclusive settings. 
(b) If an applicant for the second PCTF holds a valid Professional Educator 
Certificate in a teaching field, the methods of teaching in the teaching field and at the grade 
levels for which certification is sought is the only course required for issuance of the second 
PCTF. 
(c) If an applicant for the third PCTF holds a valid Professional Educator 
Certificate in a teaching field, the methods of teaching in the teaching field and at the grade 
levels for which certification is sought is the only course required for issuance of the third 
PCTF. 
(d) Coursework must be completed with a grade of “C” or above. 
(e) Each course must be from the approved listings available at 
www.alsde.edu/EdCert and must have been on the approved listing at the time the course was 
taken. 
(f)  Coursework applied for completion of the ABC approach cannot later be 
applied to meet coursework requirements for a State-approved program at a higher degree level 
in any area. 
(9) Degree Level. The Provisional Certificates issued through this approach shall 
be issued only at the bachelor’s degree level. 
(10) Valid Period. The certificate shall be valid for one scholastic year (July 1 to 
June 30). 
(11) Professional Educator Certification. The applicant must apply for the Class 
B Professional Educator Certificate.  Information pertaining to this approach may be found in 
Rule 290-3-2-.08. 
Author: Dr. Thomas R. Bice 
Statutory Authority: Ala. Const. Amend. 284, Ala. Code §§16-3-11, 16-23-1 and 16-23-2 (1975). 
History: Adopted new, 8-4-08, effective 9-18 -08; repealed and adopted new 12-9-10, effective 1- 14-11; repealed and 
adopted new 6-14-12, effective 7-19-12; emergency Rule to amend filed 1-10-13; amended Rule adopted 3-14 -13, effective 
4-18-13; emergency Rule to amend filed 6-13-13; amended Rule adopted 8-8-13; effective 9-12-13; emergency Rule to repeal 
filed 11-14-13; repealed and adopted new 1-17-14, effective 2-21-14; repealed and adopted new 3-10-16, effective 4-24-16. 
135 
===PAGE 38===
    
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.07 290-3-2-.07(2)(d)4. 
290-3-2-. 07 Provisional Certificate in a Career and Technical Teaching Field (PCCT) 
Approach. 
(1) Overview. A superintendent or administrator who wishes to employ an 
individual may request a Provisional Certificate in a Career and Technical Teaching Field 
(PCCT). The individual must be employed full-time in a teaching field while completing the 
requirements of the PCCT approach to earn a Class B Professional Educator Certificate in that 
teaching field. A PCCT is available for grades 6-12 teaching fields as indicated on the current 
application form. This approach was previously named the Career and Technical Alternative 
Baccalaureate-Level Certificate (CT ABC) Approach. 
(2) General Information. 
(a) An individual must complete three full years of full-time teaching experience 
in the teaching field while holding a valid PCCT and/or CT ABC in no more than two public 
school systems and/or nonpublic schools within the four scholastic years from the July 1 
beginning date of the first PCCT or CT ABC. 
(b) An individual must hold a valid certificate for all teaching fields to which he or 
she is assigned. An individual who holds only a valid PCCT must be assigned only to the 
teaching field for which the PCCT was issued. An individual who holds a valid PCCT and a 
valid certificate in another teaching field or area of instructional support must be assigned to 
the area of the PCCT for at least the majority of the day. 
(c) The superintendent or administrator must monitor the applicant’s compliance 
with the requirements of the PCCT approach.  
(d) An individual who held the first Career and Technical Alternative 
Baccalaureate-Level Certificate (CT ABC) valid for the 2013-2014, 2014-2015, or 2015-2016 
scholastic year may be issued the second and/or third PCCT in the same teaching field if all 
requirements have been met. 
1. An individual who held the first CT ABC valid for the 2013-2014 scholastic 
year and the second CT ABC valid for the 2014-2015 or the 2015-2016 scholastic year may 
be issued the third PCCT valid for the 2016-2017 scholastic year. 
2. An individual who held the first CT ABC valid for the 2014-2015 scholastic 
year and the second CT ABC valid for the 2015-2016 scholastic year may be issued the third 
PCCT valid for the 2016-2017 or 2017-2018 scholastic year. 
3. An individual who held the first CT ABC valid for the 2014-2015 scholastic 
year may be issued the second PCCT valid for the 2016-2017 scholastic year and the third 
PCCT valid for the 2017-2018 scholastic year. 
4. An individual who held the first CT ABC valid for the 2015-2016 scholastic 
year may be issued the second PCCT valid for the 2016-2017 or 2017-2018 scholastic year 
and the third PCCT valid for the 2017-2018 or 2018-2019 scholastic year. 
136 
===PAGE 39===
SUPP. NO. 16-1 
290-3-2-.07(3) 
EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.07(4)(f) 
(3) 
Certificates. 
Grade Levels, Teaching Fields, and Resulting Professional Educator 
PCCT Grade Levels 6-12 
PCCT Teaching Fields a Only for teaching fields listed on the current application 
for this approach 
Resulting Baccalaureate-Level Professional 
Educator Certificate 
Class B Secondary Professional Educator Certificate 
(Grades 6-12) 
a First, second, and third PCCTs and/or CT ABCs must be issued in the same teaching field. 
(4) Limitations on Issuance. 
(a) An individual who has earned credit in more than five professional education 
courses prior to seeking alternative certification through the PCCT approach may not be 
eligible for a first PCCT, to be determined on an individual basis. An individual who holds an 
Alabama Professional Educator Certificate or a professional educator certificate issued by 
another state may be exempt from this five course limit. 
(b) The Department may refuse to issue a certificate for an individual who was 
enrolled in, but did not meet the requirements of, an educator preparation program. 
(c) An individual may not be employed for more than three scholastic years on the 
basis of holding an Alternative Baccalaureate-Level Certificate, a Career and Technical 
Alternative Baccalaureate-Level Certificate, a Preliminary Certificate, a Preliminary 
Certificate Through Exception, a Special Alternative Certificate, a Provisional Certificate, an 
Interim Employment Certificate, a Business and Industry to Educational Administrator 
Certificate, an alternative-approach certificate issued by another state or issuing authority, or 
any combination thereof. 
(d) A PCCT is only valid for employment with the public school system or 
nonpublic school to which the PCCT was issued. 
(e) An individual who has not completed all requirements for the Class B 
Professional Educator Certificate through this approach by the expiration date of the third 
PCCT shall no longer be eligible for certification through the PCCT approach or any 
alternative certificate approach. 
(f) An individual who earns a Professional Educator Certificate or a Professional 
Leadership Certificate in the area for which the alternative certificates were issued may be 
eligible to follow an alternative approach to earning a Professional Educator Certificate or 
Professional Leadership Certificate  in another area. 
137 
===PAGE 40===
     
   
        
        
      
             
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.07(5) 290-3-2-.07(5)(b)4. 
(5) First PCCT.  
(a) Application. 
1. The applicant is required to submit to the superintendent or administrator the 
current application for this approach and documentation of having met all requirements as 
prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.07 and on the application. 
2. The superintendent or administrator who wishes to employ the applicant to 
teach full-time, except as noted in Rule 290-3-2-.07(2)(b), in the teaching field and at the grade 
level for which the PCCT is to be issued is required to submit to the Educator Certification 
Section: 
(i) A recommendation on the current application for this approach no later than 
October 1 of the scholastic year for which the PCCT is requested. 
(ii) The applicant’s current application and documentation of having met all 
requirements.   
(b) Requirements. All requirements must be successfully completed prior to 
October 1 of the scholastic year for which the first PCCT is requested. 
1. Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
2. Verification on an official transcript of at least an earned bachelor's degree from 
a regionally accredited senior institution. Verification on an official transcript of an earned 
master’s or higher degree from a regionally accredited senior institution m ay also meet the 
degree requirement. 
(i) The bachelor’s degree must be posted with a minimum overall grade point 
average (GPA) of at least 2.5 or the master’s or higher degree must be posted with a minimum 
overall GPA of at least 3.0. For issuance of the first PCCT with a valid period beginning 
July 1, 2017, and thereafter, the bachelor’s degree must be posted with a minimum 
overall GPA of at least 2.75 or the master’s or higher degree must be posted with a 
minimum overall GPA of at least 3.0. The overall GPA is the GPA posted on the official 
transcript of the degree granting institution that was used as the basis for granting the degree. 
(ii) The GPA requirement does not apply to an applicant holding a valid 
Professional Educator Certificate or Professional Leadership Certificate. 
3. Verification of current passing scores for the basic skills assessments of the 
Alabama Educator Certification Assessment Program (AECAP). This requirement does not 
apply to an applicant holding a valid Professional Educator Certificate or Professional 
Leadership Certificate. Additional information is in Rule 290-3-2-.02(9). 
4. For career and technical education teaching fields listed on the current 
application for this approach in which a Praxis II subject area test(s) is currently adopted and 
prescribed, verification of a current passing score on the prescribed Praxis II subject area test(s) 
of the AECAP.  Additional information is in Rule 290-3-2-.02(9). 
138 
===PAGE 41===
  
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.07(5)(b)5.    290-3-2-.07(6)(a)2. 
5. For the career and technical education teaching field of health science, 
verification that all of the following have been met: 
(i) Verification of an active, Alabama license in registered nursing, paramedical, 
or an approved allied health specialty. The Office of Career and Technical Education of the 
Department will verify the license. 
(ii) Verification on an official transcript from a regionally accredited senior 
institution of an earned bachelor’s or higher degree in the area of the active, Alabama license. 
The Office of Career and Technical Education of the Department will verify the area of the 
degree. 
6. For career and technical education teaching fields other than health science 
listed on the current application for this approach in which no Praxis II subject area test(s) is 
currently adopted and prescribed, verification that one of the following two options has been 
met: 
(i) Verification on an official transcript from a regionally accredited senior 
institution of an academic major in the teaching field. The Office of Career and Technical 
Education of the Department will verify the academic major.  
(ii) Verification on official transcript(s) from a regionally accredited institution of 
at least 32 semester hours of earned credit, including at least 19 semester hours of upper-
division credit, appropriate to the teaching field. The Office of Career and Technical Education 
of the Department will evaluate the transcript(s) to determine if the courses satisfy the 
necessary knowledge needed to teach the content standards in the teaching field for which the 
Professional Educator Certificate will be sought. 
7. For the career and technical education teaching fields of technical education, 
verification of a passing score on the Department-approved occupational proficiency 
assessment (test score, license, or credential) for the technical education program area for 
which the certificate is sought. Information on the approved occupational proficiency 
assessments can be obtained from the Office of Career and Technical Education of the 
Department. 
8. An assigned mentor as required in Rule 290-3-2-.01(29). 
(6) Second PCCT.  
(a) Application. 
1. The applicant is required to submit to the superintendent or administrator the 
current application for this approach and documentation of having met all requirements as 
prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.07 and on the application. 
2. The superintendent or administrator who wishes to employ the applicant to 
teach full-time, except as noted in Rule 290-3-2-.07(2)(b), in the teaching field and at the grade 
level for which the PCCT is to be issued is required to submit to the Educator Certification 
Section: 
139 
===PAGE 42===
  
--
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.07(6)(a)2.(i) 290-3-2-.07(7)(a)1. 
(i) A recommendation on the current application for this approach no later than 
October 1 of the scholastic year for which the PCCT is requested. 
(ii) The applicant’s current application and documentation of having met all 
requirements. 
(b) Requirements. All requirements must be successfully completed prior to 
October 1 of the scholastic year for which the second PCCT is requested. 
1. Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
2. Verification on Supplement EXP of a full year of full-time classroom teaching 
experience: 
(i) In the teaching field and at the grade level for which the first PCCT was issued, 
while holding the first PCCT, except as noted in Rule 290-3-2-.07(2)(b); or 
(ii) In the teaching field and at the grade level for which the first CT ABC was 
issued, while holding the first CT ABC valid for the 2014-2015 or 2015-2016 scholastic year, 
except as noted in Rule 290-3-2-.12(1)(f) of Supplement Number 10-4 of the Educator 
Certification Chapter of the Alabama Administrative Code. 
3. Verification on an official transcript(s) of credit earned for at least two of the 
four courses as required in Rule 290-3-2-.07(8) and on the current application for this 
approach. If an applicant holds a valid Professional Educator Certificate in a teaching 
field, the methods of teaching in the teaching field and at the grade levels for which 
certification is sought is the only course required for issuance of the second PCCT. 
4. Verification of successful completion of Session A of the Career and Technical 
Education Teacher Certification Program (CTE TCP).  Session A of the CTE TCP is required 
if the applicant does not hold a valid Professional Educator Certificate in a career and technical 
teaching field, a valid Specialty Area Career and Technical Certificate, or a valid Degree 
Equivalent Career and Technical Certificate. Successful completion must be verified by 
submission of one of the following: 
(i) Department-approved professional development training history. 
(ii) Certificate of completion. 
5. For the career and technical education teaching field of health science, 
verification of an active, Alabama license in registered nursing, paramedical, or an approved 
allied health specialty. 
6. An assigned mentor as required in Rule 290-3-2-.01(29). 
(7) Third PCCT.  
(a) Application. 
1. The applicant is required to submit to the superintendent or administrator the 
current application for this approach and documentation of having met all requirements as 
prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.07 and on the application. 
140 
===PAGE 43===
  
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.07(7)(a)2. 290-3-2-.07(8) 
2. The superintendent or administrator who wishes to employ the applicant to 
teach full-time, except as noted in Rule 290-3-2-.07(2)(b), in the teaching field and at the grade 
level for which the PCCT is to be issued is required to submit to the Educator Certification 
Section: 
(i) A recommendation on the current application for this approach no later than 
October 1 of the scholastic year for which the PCCT is requested. 
(ii) The applicant’s current application and documentation of having met all 
requirements. 
(b) Requirements. All requirements must be successfully completed prior to 
October 1 of the scholastic year for which the third PCCT is requested. 
1. Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
2. Verification on Supplement EXP of a full year of full-time classroom teaching 
experience: 
(i) In the teaching field and at the grade level for which the second PCCT was 
issued, while holding the second PCCT, except as noted in Rule 290-3-2-.07(2)(b); or 
(ii) In the teaching field and at the grade level for which the second PCCT was 
issued, while holding the second PCCT valid for the 2014-2015 or 2015-2016 scholastic year, 
except as noted in Rule 290-3-2-.12(1)(f) of Supplement Number 10-4 of the Educator 
Certification Chapter of the Alabama Administrative Code. 
3. Verification on an official transcript(s) of credit earned for the remaining two 
of the four courses as required in Rule 290-3-2-.07(8) and on the current application for this 
approach. If an applicant holds a valid Professional Educator Certificate in a teaching 
field, the methods of teaching in the teaching field and at the grade levels for which 
certification is sought is the only course required for issuance of the third PCCT. 
4. Verification of a current passing score attained on the prescribed Praxis II 
Principles of Learning and Teaching Test (PLT) of the Alabama Educator Certification 
Assessment Program (AECAP). This requirement does not apply to an applicant holding a 
valid Professional Educator Certificate or a valid Professional Leadership Certificate.  
Additional information is in Rule 290-3-2-.02(9). 
5. For the career and technical education teaching field of health science, 
verification of an active, Alabama license in registered nursing, paramedical, or an approved 
allied health specialty.  
6. An assigned mentor as required in Rule 290-3-2-.01(29). 
(8) Course Requirements. An applicant pursuing certification through the PCCT 
approach must earn credit for the required coursework prior to October 1 of the scholastic year 
for which the second and third PCCTs are to be issued. 
141 
===PAGE 44===
  
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.07(8)(a) 290-3-2-.07 History 
(a) Coursework must be completed at an Alabama regionally accredited senior 
institution with State-approved programs and include each of the following areas: 
1. Classroom management; 
2. Evaluation of teaching and learning; 
3. Methods of teaching in the teaching field and at the grade levels for which 
certification is sought; and 
4. Strategies for teaching special needs students in inclusive settings. 
(b) If an applicant for the second PCCT holds a valid Professional Educator 
Certificate in a teaching field, the methods of teaching in the teaching field and at the grade 
levels for which certification is sought is the only course required for issuance of the second 
PCCT.  
(c) If an applicant for the third PCCT holds a valid Professional Educator 
Certificate in a teaching field, the methods of teaching in the teaching field and at the grade 
levels for which certification is sought is the only course required for issuance of the third 
PCCT. 
(d) Coursework must be completed with a grade of “C” or above. 
(e) Each course must be from the approved listings available at 
www.alsde.edu/EdCert and must have been on the approved listing at the time the course was 
taken.     
(f)   Coursework applied for completion of the PCCT approach cannot later be 
applied to meet coursework requirements for a State-approved program at a higher degree level 
in any area. 
(g) No component of the Career and Technical Education Teacher Certification 
Program (CTE TCP) may be used to meet these requirements. 
(9) Degree Level. The Provisional Certificates issued through this approach shall 
be issued only at the bachelor’s degree level. 
(10) Valid Period. The certificate shall be valid for one scholastic year (July 1 to 
June 30). 
(11) Professional Educator Certification. The applicant must apply for the Class 
B Professional Educator Certificate.  Information pertaining to this approach may be found in 
Rule 290-3-2-.08. 
Author: Dr. Thomas R. Bice 
Statutory Authority: Ala. Const. Amend. 284, Ala. Code §§16-3-11, 16-23-1 and 16-23-2 (1975). 
History: Adopted new, 8-4-08, effective 9-18 -08; repealed and adopted new 12-9-10, effective 1- 14-11; repealed and 
adopted new 6-14-12, effective 7-19-12; emergency Rule to amend filed 1-10-13; amended Rule adopted 3-14 -13, effective 
4-18-13; emergency Rule to amend filed 6-13-13; amended Rule adopted 8-8-13; effective 9-12-13; emergency Rule to repeal 
filed 11-14-13; repealed and adopted new 1-17-14, effective 2-21-14; repealed and adopted new 3-10-16, effective 4-24-16 . 
142 
===PAGE 45===
 
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.08 290-3-2-.08(6) 
290-3-2-.08 Professional Certification Following the Provisional Certificate in a Teaching 
Field (PCTF) or Provisional Certificate in a Career and Technical Teaching Field 
(PCCT) Approach. 
(1) Overview. An individual who has held the first, second, and third PCTF and/or 
ABC or PCCT and/or CT ABC may meet requirements for a Class B Professional Educator 
Certificate in the same teaching field and grade level for which the three PCTFs/ABCs or 
PCCTs/CT ABCs were issued. 
(2) Limitation on Issuance. An individual who does not apply by October 1 of the 
calendar year during which the third PCTF or PCCT expires will forfeit the right to seek a 
Professional Educator Certificate through this approach. 
(3) Application. 
(a) The applicant is required to submit to the Educator Certification Section the 
current application for this approach and documentation of having met all requirements as 
prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.08 and on the application. 
(b) The application must be received in the Educator Certification Section no later 
than October 1 of the calendar year during which the third PCTF or PCCT expires. 
(4) Requirements for Issuance of the Professional Educator Certificate. 
(a) Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in Rule 290-3-2-
.02(4). 
(b) Verification on Supplement EXP of a full year of full-time classroom teaching 
experience, except as noted in Rule 290-3-2-.06(2)(b) and Rule 290-3-2-.07(2)(b), in the 
teaching field and at the grade level for which the third PCTF or PCCT was issued, while 
holding the third PCTF or PCCT. 
(c) For the career and technical education teaching field of health science, 
verification of an active Alabama license in registered nursing, paramedical, or an approved 
allied health specialty. 
(d) For the career and technical education teaching fields of technical education, 
verification of a passing score on the Alabama State Department of Education approved 
occupational proficiency assessment (test score, license, or credential) for the technical 
education program area for which the Professional Educator Certificate is sought. Information 
on the approved occupational proficiency assessments can be obtained from the Office of 
Career and Technical Education of the Department. 
(5) Alabama Educator Certification Assessment Program (AECAP). The 
applicant must meet the requirements of the AECAP for this approach. 
(6) Degree Level. The Professional Educator Certificate issued through this 
approach shall be issued only at the Class B (bachelor’s degree) level. 
143 
===PAGE 46===
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.08(7) 290-3-2-.08 History 
(7) Valid Period. The valid period of the certificate shall be from the date of 
issuance through the remainder of the same scholastic year, and thereafter, for the next five 
consecutive scholastic years. 
Author: Dr. Thomas R. Bice 
Statutory Authority: Ala. Const. Amend. 284, Ala. Code §§16-3-11, 16-23-1 and 16-23-2 (1975). 
History: Adopted new, 8-4-08, effective 9-18 -08; repealed and adopted new 12-9-10, effective 1- 14-11; repealed and 
adopted new 6-14-12, effective 7-19-12; emergency Rule to amend filed 1-10-13; amended Rule adopted 3-14 -13, effective 
4-18-13; emergency Rule to amend filed 6-13-13; amended Rule adopted 8-8-13; effective 9-12-13; emergency Rule to repeal 
filed 11-14-13; repealed and adopted new 1-17-14, effective 2-21-14; repealed and adopted new 3-10-16, effective 4-24-16. 
144 
===PAGE 47===
    
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.09 290-3-2-.09(2)(e)4. 
290-3-2-.09 Interim Employment Certificate in a Teaching Field (IEC) Approach. 
(1) Overview. This approach was previously named the Special Alternative 
Certificate (SAC) Approach for Teaching Fields. A superintendent or administrator who 
wishes to employ an individual may request an Interim Employment Certificate in a Teaching 
Field (IEC). The individual must be unconditionally admitted to one of the following: 
(a) State-approved Alternative Class A program in a teaching field; 
(b) State-approved Class A program in an area of Special Education, Reading 
Specialist, or English for Speakers of Other Languages; or 
(c) State-approved Class AA program in an area of Special Education. 
(2) General Information. 
(a)    An individual may complete up to three scholastic years of employment while 
holding a valid IEC and/or SAC. All three IECs and/or SACs must be issued within a four 
consecutive scholastic year time period. The employment does not have to be full-time and 
does not have to be in the same public school system and/or nonpublic school.  
(b) An individual must hold a valid certificate for all teaching fields and/or areas 
of instructional support to which he or she is assigned. An individual who holds only a valid 
IEC must be assigned only to the teaching field for which the IEC was issued. 
(c)    The superintendent or administrator must monitor the applicant’s compliance 
with the requirements of the IEC approach.  
(d) The IEC is not a prerequisite for a Professional Educator Certificate. 
(e) An individual who held the first Special Alternative Certificate (SAC) valid for 
the 2013-2014, 2014-2015, or 2015-2016 scholastic year may be issued the second and/or third 
IEC in the same teaching field if all requirements have been met. 
1. An individual who held the first SAC valid for the 2013-2014 scholastic year 
and the second SAC valid for the 2014-2015 or the 2015-2016 scholastic year may be issued 
the third IEC valid for the 2016-2017 scholastic year. 
2. An individual who held the first SAC valid for the 2014-2015 scholastic year 
and the second SAC valid for the 2015-2016 scholastic year may be issued the third IEC valid 
for the 2016-2017 or 2017-2018 scholastic year. 
3. An individual who held the first SAC valid for the 2014-2015 scholastic year 
may be issued the second IEC valid for the 2016-2017 scholastic year and the third IEC valid 
for the 2017-2018 scholastic year. 
4. An individual who held the first SAC valid for the 2015-2016 scholastic year 
may be issued the second IEC valid for the 2016-2017 or 2017-2018 scholastic year and the 
third IEC valid for the 2017-2018 or 2018-2019 scholastic year. 
145 
===PAGE 48===
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.09(3) 290-3-2-.09(5)(a)1. 
(3) Grade Levels and Teaching Fields Available for IECs. 
IEC Grade Levels P-3 K-6 4-8 6-12 P-12 P-3, 
K-6, 
6-12, 
P-12 
IEC Teaching Fields Early 
Childhood a 
Elementary a Middle a, b Secondary a, b Elementary-
Secondary a, b 
Special 
Education a, b 
aFirst, second, and third IECs and/or SACs must be issued in the same teaching field and at the same grade level. 
bTeaching fields and grade levels are identified in the current Educator Preparation Chapter of the Alabama 
Administrative Code. 
(4) Limitations on Issuance.  
(a) An individual may not be employed for more than three scholastic years on the 
basis of holding an Alternative Baccalaureate-Level Certificate, a Career and Technical 
Alternative Baccalaureate-Level Certificate, a Preliminary Certificate, a Preliminary Certificate 
Through Exception, a Special Alternative Certificate, an Interim Employment Certificate , a 
Provisional Certificate, a Business and Industry to Educational Administrator Certificate, an 
alternative-approach certificate issued by another state or issuing authority, or any combination 
thereof. 
(b) An individual who has not completed all requirements for professional educator 
certification by the expiration date of the third IEC shall no longer be eligible for certification 
through the IEC approach.   
(c) An individual who earns a Professional Educator Certificate or Professional 
Leadership Certificate in the area for which the alternative certificates were issued may be 
eligible to follow an alternative approach to earning a Professional Educator Certificate or 
Professional Leadership Certificate  in another area. 
(d) Individuals who held a first Special Alternative Certificate (SAC) in a teaching 
field prior to the 2011-2012 scholastic year are no longer eligible for a second or third SAC in 
that teaching field under the rules that were in effect at the time the first SAC was issued. If the 
three year alternative certificate cap as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.09(4)(a) has not been 
exceeded, an individual may meet all requirements for a first IEC as prescribed in 
Rule 290-3-2-.09(5) and possibly a second IEC as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.09(6). 
(5) First IEC in a Teaching Field.  
(a) Application. 
1. The applicant is required to submit to the superintendent or administrator the 
current application for this approach and documentation of having met all requirements as 
prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.09 and on the application. 
146 
===PAGE 49===
     
  
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.09(5)(a)2. 290-3-2-.09(5)(b)4.(i)  
2. The superintendent or administrator who wishes to employ the applicant to 
teach in the teaching field and at the grade level of the State-approved program to which to 
applicant has been unconditionally admitted and for which the IEC is to be issued is required 
to submit to the Educator Certification Section: 
(i) A recommendation on the current application for this approach during the 
scholastic year for which the IEC is requested.   
(ii) Official verification from the Alabama college or university of unconditional 
admission to the appropriate State-approved program and documentation of having met all 
requirements. 
(iii) The applicant’s current application and documentation of having met all 
requirements. 
(b) Requirements. All requirements must be successfully completed prior to the 
date the application is received in the Educator Certification Section. 
1. Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
2. For Alternative Class A State-approved programs. 
(i) Verification on an official transcript of at least an earned bachelor’s degree from 
a regionally accredited senior institution. Additional information is in the Educator Preparation 
Chapter of the Alabama Administrative Code. 
(ii) Verification on the current application form for this approach of unconditional 
admission to the Alternative Class A program in the teaching field and at the grade level for 
which the IEC is to be issued. Additional information is in the Educator Preparation Chapter 
of the Alabama Administrative Code. 
(iii) Verification of current passing scores for the basic skills assessments of the 
Alabama Educator Certification Assessment Program (AECAP). If the applicant is 
unconditionally admitted to an Alternative Class A program on September 1, 2013 or 
thereafter, the basic skills assessments of the AECAP are required for unconditional admission. 
This requirement does not apply to an applicant holding a valid Professional Educator 
Certificate or a valid Professional Leadership Certificate. Additional information is in the 
Educator Preparation Chapter of the Alabama Administrative Code. 
(iv) For teaching fields in which a Praxis II subject area test(s) is currently adopted 
and prescribed, verification of a current passing score on the Praxis II subject area test(s) of 
the AECAP prescribed for issuance of the first IEC. 
3. For Class A State-approved programs in English for Speakers of Other 
Languages (ESOL). 
(i) At least a valid Class B Professional Educator Certificate in any teaching field. 
(ii) Verification on the current application form for this approach of unconditional 
admission to a Class A State-approved program in ESOL as prescribed in the Educator 
Preparation Chapter of the Alabama Administrative Code. 
4. For Class A State-approved programs in Reading Specialist. 
(i) At least a valid Class B Professional Educator Certificate in a teaching field as 
prescribed in the Educator Preparation Chapter of the Alabama Administrative Code. 
147 
===PAGE 50===
     
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.09(5)(b)4.(ii) 290-3-2-.09(6)(b)2. 
(ii) Verification on the current application form for this approach of unconditional 
admission to a Class A State-approved program in Reading Specialist as prescribed in the 
Educator Preparation Chapter of the Alabama Administrative Code. 
5. For Class A State-approved programs in Special Education. 
(i) At least a valid Class B Professional Educator Certificate in a teaching field.  
An applicant who holds a valid Class B, A, or AA Professional Educator Certificate at the 
grade level and in the special education teaching field of the Class A program to which he/she 
has been unconditionally admitted is not eligible for an IEC. 
(ii) Verification on the current application form for this approach of unconditional 
admission to a Class A State-approved program at the grade level and in the teaching field of 
special education for which the IEC is to be issued as prescribed in the Educator Preparation 
Chapter of the Alabama Administrative Code. 
6. For Class AA State-approved programs in special education.  
(i) At least a valid Class A Professional Educator Certificate in a teaching field.  
An applicant who holds a valid Class B, A, or AA Professional Educator Certificate at the 
grade level and in the special education teaching field of the Class AA program to which he/she 
has been unconditionally admitted is not eligible for an IEC. 
(ii) Verification on the current application form for this approach of unconditional 
admission to a Class AA State-approved program at the grade level and in the teaching field 
of special education for which the IEC is to be issued as prescribed in the Educator Preparation 
Chapter of the Alabama Administrative Code. 
7. An assigned mentor as required in Rule 290-3-2-.01(29). 
(6) Second IEC in a Teaching Field.  
(a) Application. 
1. The applicant is required to submit to the superintendent or administrator the 
current application for this approach and documentation of having met all requirements as 
prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.09 and on the application. 
2. The superintendent or administrator who wishes to employ the applicant to 
teach in the teaching field and at the grade level for which the IEC is to be issued is required 
to submit to the Educator Certification Section: 
(i) A recommendation on the current application for this approach during the 
scholastic year for which the IEC is requested.   
(ii) The
 applicant’s current application and documentation of having met all 
requirements. 
(b) Requirements. All requirements must be successfully completed prior to the 
date the application is received in the Educator Certification Section. 
1. Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
2. Verification on an official transcript of credit earned for at least three courses 
in the State-approved program for which the first IEC or SAC was issued. 
148 
===PAGE 51===
    
   
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.09(6)(b)3.   290-3-2-.09 History 
3. An assigned mentor as required in Rule 290-3-2-.01(29). 
(7) Third IEC in a Teaching Field.  
(a) Application. 
1. The applicant is required to submit to the superintendent or administrator 
the current application for this approach and documentation of having met all requirements 
as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.09 and on the application. 
2. The superintendent or administrator who wishes to employ the applicant to 
teach in the teaching field and at the grade level for which the IEC is to be issued is required 
to submit to the Educator Certification Section: 
(i) A recommendation on the current application for this approach during the 
scholastic year for which the IEC is requested.   
(ii) The
 applicant’s current application and documentation of having met all 
requirements. 
(b) Requirements. All requirements must be successfully completed prior to 
the date the application is received in the Educator Certification Section. 
1. Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in                                 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
2. Verification on an official transcript of credit earned for at least four 
additional courses in the State-approved program for which the second IEC or SAC was 
issued. 
3. An assigned mentor as required in Rule 290-3-2-.01(29). 
(8) Degree Level. The IEC shall be issued only at the bachelor’s degree level. 
(9) Valid Period. The valid period of the IEC shall be no more than one 
scholastic year (July 1 to June 30). The IEC will be valid from the date the certificate is 
issued through June 30 of the scholastic year for which it is issued. 
(10) Application for the Professional Educator Certificate.  
(a) The IEC is not a prerequisite for a Professional Educator Certificate. 
(b) An applicant who completes all requirements of a State-approved program 
and is recommended by the institution may be issued a Class A Professional Educator 
Certificate or a Class AA Professional Educator Certificate. 
Author: Dr. Thomas R. Bice. 
Statutory Authority: Ala. Const. Amend. 284, Ala. Code §§16-3-11, 16-23-1 and 16-23-2 (1975). 
History: New 12-19-78, repealed 12-8-94, effective 12-31-96; new adopted 12-8-94, effective 1-1-97, repealed 11- 14-
96 and amended repealed date of original chapter to 6-30 -97 new adopted 1-9-97 effective 7-1-97; amended: 6-14 -99; 
effective 7-19-99; amended: 9-9-99; effective 10-14-99, repealed and new adopted 06-13-02; emergency Rule to appeal 
and adopt new filed on 6-13-02; new adopted 8-8-02, effective 9-12-02; emergency Rule to appeal and adopt new filed 
on 10-10 -02; new adopted 12-12 -02, effective 1-16-03; repealed and new adopted 09-11 -03 effective 10-16-03; 
emergency amended Rule adopted 4-14-05, effective 4-14-05; amended Rule adopted 6-9-05, effective 7-14-05; repealed 
and adopted new, 8-4-08, effective 9-18-08; repealed and adopted new 12-9-10, effective 1-14-11; repealed and adopted 
new 3-10-16, effective 4-24-16. 
149 
===PAGE 52===
   
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.10 290-3-2-.10(2)(e)4. 
290-3-2-.10 Interim Employment Certificate in an Area of Instructional Support (IEC) 
Approach. 
(1) Overview. This approach was previously named the Special Alternative 
Certificate (SAC) Approach for Areas of Instructional Support. A superintendent or 
administrator who wishes to employ an individual may request an Interim Employment 
Certificate in a certain Areas of Instructional Support (IEC). The individual must be 
unconditionally admitted to one of the following: 
(a) State-approved Class A program in school counseling, library media, or 
instructional leadership; or 
(b) Council for Accreditation of Counseling and Related Educational Programs 
(CACREP) accredited program in school counseling at an Alabama institution. 
(2) General Information. 
(a)    An individual may complete up to three scholastic years of employment 
while holding a valid IEC and/or SAC. All three IECs and/or SACs must be issued within 
a four consecutive scholastic year time period. The employment does not have to be full-
time and does not have to be in the same public school system and/or nonpublic school.  
(b) An individual must hold a valid certificate for teaching fields and/or areas 
of instructional support to which he or she is assigned. An individual who holds only a 
valid IEC must be assigned only to the area of instructional support for which the IEC was 
issued. 
(c)   The superintendent or administrator must monitor the applicant’s 
compliance with the requirements of the IEC approach.  
(d) The IEC is not a prerequisite for a Professional Educator Certificate or a 
Professional Leadership Certificate.  
(e) An individual who held the first Special Alternative Certificate (SAC) valid 
for the 2013-2014, 2014-2015, or 2015-2016 scholastic year may be issued the second 
and/or third IEC in the same teaching field if all requirements have been met. 
1. An individual who held the first SAC valid for the 2013-2014 scholastic 
year and the second SAC valid for the 2014-2015 or the 2015-2016 scholastic year may be 
issued the third IEC valid for the 2016-2017 scholastic year. 
2. An individual who held the first SAC valid for the 2014-2015 scholastic 
year and the second SAC valid for the 2015-2016 scholastic year may be issued the third 
IEC valid for the 2016-2017 or 2017-2018 scholastic year. 
3. An individual who held the first SAC valid for the 2014-2015 scholastic 
year may be issued the second IEC valid for the 2016-2017 scholastic year and the third 
IEC valid for the 2017-2018 scholastic year. 
4. An individual who held the first SAC valid for the 2015-2016 scholastic 
year may be issued the second IEC valid for the 2016-2017 or 2017-2018 scholastic year 
and the third IEC valid for the 2017-2018 or 2018-2019 scholastic year. 
150 
===PAGE 53===
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.10(3) 290-3-2-.10(5)(a)1. 
(3) Areas of Instructional Support Available for IECs. 
Grade Levels: P-12 
Areas of Instructional 
Support Personnel a 
Instructional Leadership, School Counseling, or Library-Media 
aFirst, second, and third IECs and/or SACs must be issued in the same area. 
(4) Limitations on Issuance. 
(a) The IEC is not available in the areas of School Psychometry, School 
Psychology or Speech-Language Pathology. 
(b) An individual may not be employed for more than three scholastic years on 
the basis of holding an Alternative Baccalaureate-Level Certificate, a Career and Technical 
Alternative Baccalaureate-Level Certificate, a Preliminary Certificate, a Preliminary 
Certificate Through Exception, a Special Alternative Certificate, an Interim Employment 
Certificate, a Provisional Certificate, a Business and Industry to Educational Administrator 
Certificate, an alternative-approach certificate issued by another state or issuing authority, 
or any combination thereof. 
(c) An individual who has not completed all requirements for professional 
educator certification or professional leadership certification by the expiration date of the 
third IEC shall no longer be eligible for certification through the IEC approach.  
(d) An individual who earns a Professional Educator Certificate or Professional 
Leadership Certificate in the area for which the alternative certificates were issued may be 
eligible to follow an alternative approach to earning a Professional Educator Certificate or 
Professional Leadership Certificate  in another area. 
(e)    Individuals who held a first Special Alternative Certificate (SAC) in an area 
of instructional support prior to the 2011-2012 scholastic year are no longer eligible for a 
second or third SAC in that area of instructional support under the rules that were in effect 
at the time the first SAC was issued. If the three year alternative certificate cap as 
prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.10(4)(b) has not been exceeded, an individual may meet all 
requirements for a first IEC as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.10(5) and possibly a second 
IEC as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.10(6). 
(5) First IEC in an Area of Instructional Support.  
(a) Application. 
1. The applicant is required to submit to the superintendent or administrator 
the current application for this approach and documentation of having met all requirements 
as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.10 and on the application. 
151 
===PAGE 54===
    
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.10(5)(a)2.                                                                     290-3-2.10(5)(b)4.(ii) 
2. The superintendent or administrator who wishes to employ the applicant to 
serve in the area of instructional support of the State-approved or CACREP-accredited 
program to which the applicant has been unconditionally admitted and for which the IEC 
is to be issued is required to submit to the Educator Certification Section: 
(i) A recommendation on the current application for this approach during the 
scholastic year for which the IEC is requested.   
(ii) Official verification from the Alabama college or university of 
unconditional admission to the appropriate State-approved or CACREP-accredited 
program and documentation of having met all requirements. 
(iii) The
 applicant’s current application and documentation of having met all 
requirements. 
(b) Requirements. All requirements must be successfully completed prior to 
the date the application is received in the Educator Certification Section. 
1. Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in                                 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
2. For Class A State-approved programs in School Counseling. 
(i) At least a valid Class B Professional Educator Certificate in a teaching field, 
a valid Class A Professional Educator Certificate in a teaching field or another area of 
instructional support, or a valid Class A Professional Leadership Certificate as prescribed 
in the Educator Preparation Chapter of the Alabama Administrative Code. 
(ii) Verification on the current application form for this approach of 
unconditional admission to a Class A State-approved program in school counseling as 
prescribed in the Educator Preparation Chapter of the Alabama Administrative Code. 
3. For Class A State-approved programs in Library Media. 
(i) At least a valid Class B Professional Educator Certificate in a teaching field, 
a valid Class A Professional Educator Certificate in a teaching field or another area of 
instructional support, or a valid Class A Professional Leadership Certificate as prescribed 
in the Educator Preparation Chapter of the Alabama Administrative Code. 
(ii) Verification on the current application form for this approach of 
unconditional admission to a Class A State-approved program in library media as 
prescribed in the Educator Preparation Chapter of the Alabama Administrative Code. 
4. For Class A State-approved programs in Instructional Leadership. 
(i) At least a valid Class B Professional Educator Certificate in a teaching field 
or a valid Class A Professional Educator Certificate in a teaching field or an area of 
instructional support as prescribed in the Educator Preparation Chapter of the Alabama 
Administrative Code. 
(ii) Verification on the current application form for this approach of 
unconditional admission to a Class A State-approved program in instructional leadership 
as prescribed in the Educator Preparation Chapter of the Alabama Administrative Code. 
152 
===PAGE 55===
 
    
--
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.10(5)(b)5. 290-3-2-.10(7)(a)1. 
5. For CACREP-accredited School Counseling programs. 
(i) Verification on an official transcript of at least an earned bachelor’s degree 
from a regionally accredited senior institution.  
(ii) Verification on the current application form for this approach of 
unconditional admission to a CACREP-accredited school counseling program at an 
Alabama institution. 
(iii) Verification of current passing scores for the basic skills assessments of the 
Alabama Educator Certification Assessment Program (AECAP). This requirement does 
not apply to an applicant holding a valid Professional Educator Certificate or a valid 
Professional Leadership Certificate.  
6. An assigned mentor as required in Rule 290-3-2-.01(29). 
(6) Second IEC in an Area of Instructional Support.  
(a) Application. 
1. The applicant is required to submit to the superintendent or administrator 
the current application for this approach and documentation of having met all requirements 
as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.10 and on the application. 
2. The superintendent or administrator who wishes to employ the applicant to 
serve in the area of instructional support for which the IEC is to be issued is required to 
submit to the Educator Certification Section: 
(i) A recommendation on the current application for this approach during the 
scholastic year for which the IEC is requested.   
(ii) The applicant’s current application and documentation of having met all 
requirements. 
(b) Requirements. All requirements must be successfully completed prior to 
the date the application is received in the Educator Certification Section. 
1. Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in                                 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(5). 
2. Verification on an official transcript of credit earned for at least three 
courses in one of the following: 
(i) The State-approved program for the area of instructional support in which 
the first IEC or SAC was issued; or 
(ii) The CACREP-accredited school counseling program. 
3. An assigned mentor as required in Rule 290-3-2-.01(29). 
(7) Third IEC in an Area of Instructional Support.  
(a) Application. 
1. The applicant is required to submit to the superintendent or administrator 
the current application for this approach and documentation of having met all requirements 
as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.10 and on the application. 
153 
===PAGE 56===
    
    
--
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.10(7)(a)2. 290-3-2-.10 History 
2. The superintendent or administrator who wishes to employ the applicant to 
serve in the area of instructional support for which the IEC is to be issued is required to 
submit to the Educator Certification Section: 
(i) A recommendation on the current application for this approach during the 
scholastic year for which the IEC is requested.   
(ii) The applicant’s current application and documentation of having met all 
requirements. 
(b) Requirements. All requirements must be successfully completed prior to 
the date the application is received in the Educator Certification Section. 
1. Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in                               
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
2. Verification on an official transcript of credit earned for at least four 
additional courses in one of the following: 
(i) The State-approved program for the area of instructional support in which 
the second IEC or SAC was issued; or 
(ii) The CACREP-accredited school counseling program. 
3. An assigned mentor as required in Rule 290-3-2-.01(29). 
(8) Degree Level. The IEC shall be issued only at the bachelor’s degree level. 
(9) Valid Period. The valid period of the IEC shall be no more than one 
scholastic year (July 1 to June 30). The IEC will be valid from the date the certificate is 
issued through June 30 of the scholastic year for which it is issued. 
(10) Application for the Professional Educator Certificate or Professional 
Leadership Certificate. 
(a) The IEC is not a prerequisite for a Professional Educator Certificate or a 
Professional Leadership Certificate. 
(b) An applicant who completes all requirements of a State-approved Class A 
program and is recommended by the institution may be issued a Class A Professional 
Educator Certificate or a Class A Professional Leadership Certificate. 
(c) An applicant who completes a CACREP-accredited school counseling 
program may apply for the Class A School Counselor Professional Educator Certificate 
through the Council for Accreditation of Counseling and Related Education Programs 
(CACREP) Approach as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.22. 
Author: Dr. Thomas R. Bice. 
Statutory Authority: Ala. Const. Amend. 284, Ala. Code §§16-3-11, 16-23-1 and 16-23-2 (1975). 
History: New 12-19-78, repealed 12-8-94, effective 12-31-96; new adopted 12-8-94, effective 1-1-97, repealed 11- 14-
96 and amended repealed date of original chapter to 6-30 -97 new adopted 1-9-97 effective 7-1-97; amended: 6-14 -99; 
effective 7-19-99; amended: 9-9-99; effective 10-14-99, repealed and new adopted 06-13-02; emergency Rule to appeal 
and adopt new filed on 6-13-02; new adopted 8-8-02, effective 9-12-02; emergency Rule to appeal and adopt new filed 
on 10-10 -02; new adopted 12-12 -02, effective 1-16-03; repealed and new adopted 09-11 -03 effective 10-16-03; 
emergency amended Rule adopted 4-14-05, effective 4-14-05; amended Rule adopted 6-9-05, effective 7-14-05; repealed 
and adopted new, 8-4-08, effective 9-18-08; repealed and adopted new 12-9-10, effective 1-14-11; repealed and adopted 
new 3-10-16, effective 4-24-16. 
154 
===PAGE 57===
  
     
 
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.11 290-3-2-.11(3)Footnote “a” 
290-3-2-.11 Provisional Certificate in Library Media or School Counseling (PCLS) 
Approach. 
(1) Overview. This approach was previously named the Preliminary Certificate (PRE) 
Approach. When no other certification approach is applicable, a superintendent or 
administrator who wishes to employ an individual may request a Provisional Certificate (PCLS). 
The individual must be employed full-time in the area of instructional support for which the 
certificate is issued while completing the requirements of the PCLS approach to earn at least a 
Class A Professional Educator Certificate in that area. A PCLS is available only in the areas 
of Library Media and School Counseling. 
(2) General Information. 
(a) An individual must complete two full scholastic years of full-time professional 
educational work experience in the area of instructional support for which the certificate is 
issued while holding the valid PCLS and/or PRE in no more than two public school systems 
and/or nonpublic schools within the four scholastic years from the July 1 beginning date of the 
first PCLS or PRE.  
(b) An individual must hold a valid certificate for all teaching fields and/or areas of 
instructional support to which he or she is assigned. An individual who holds a valid PCLS 
must be assigned only to the area of instructional support for which the PCLS was issued. 
(c) The superintendent or administrator must monitor the applicant’s compliance 
with the requirements of the PCLS approach.    
(d) An individual who held the first Preliminary Certificate (PRE) in library media, 
school counseling, or speech or language impairment valid for the 2013-2014, 2014-2015, or 
2015-2016 scholastic year may be issued the second PCLS in the same area if all requirements 
have been met. 
1. An individual who held the first PRE valid for the 2013-2014 scholastic year 
may be issued the second PCLS valid for the 2016-2017 scholastic year. 
2. An individual who held the first PRE valid for the 2014-2015 scholastic year 
may be issued the second PCLS valid for the 2016-2017 or 2017-2018 scholastic year. 
3. An individual who held the first PRE valid for the 2015-2016 scholastic year 
may be issued the second PCLS valid for the 2016-2017, 2017-2018, or 2018-2019 scholastic 
year. 
(3) Grade Levels, Areas of Instructional Support, and Resulting Professional 
Educator Certificate. 
PCLS Grade Levels P – 12 
PCLS Areas of Instructional Support: 
Library Media or School Counseling 
A 
Resulting Professional Educator Certificate Class A or AA 
aFirst and second PCLSs and/or PREs must be issued in the same area. 
155 
===PAGE 58===
     
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.11(4) 290-3-2-.11(5)(a)2.(i) 
(4) Limitations on Issuance.  
(a) An individual may not be employed for more than three scholastic years on the 
basis of holding an Alternative Baccalaureate-Level Certificate, a Career and Technical 
Alternative Baccalaureate-Level Certificate, a Preliminary Certificate, a Preliminary 
Certificate Through Exception, a Special Alternative Certificate, a Provisional Certificate, an 
Interim Employment Certificate, a Business and Industry to Educational Administrator 
Certificate, an alternative-approach certificate issued by another state or issuing authority, or 
any combination thereof. 
(b) A PCLS is only valid for employment with the public school system or nonpublic 
school to which the PCLS was issued. 
(c) An individual who has not completed all requirements for professional educator 
certification through this approach by the expiration date of the second PCLS shall no longer 
be eligible for certification through the PCLS approach.  
(d) An individual who earns a Professional Educator Certificate or Professional 
Leadership Certificate in the area for which the alternative certificates were issued may be 
eligible to follow an alternative approach to earning a Professional Educator Certificate or 
Professional Leadership Certificate in another area. 
(e) A PCLS for the requested area will not be issued for individuals who could meet 
requirements for certification through any other alternative, reciprocal, or traditional approach 
option for the requested area. 
(f) A PCLS will not be issued to an individual who holds an expired Alabama 
Professional Educator Certificate in Library Media or School Counseling or an expired 
professional educator certificate in Library Media or School Counseling issued by another 
state. 
(g) A first PCLS in speech or language impairment/speech-language pathology at the 
master’s degree level or higher will not be issued with a valid period beginning on or a fter 
July 1, 2016. Available approaches for speech or language impaired certification are in 
Rules 290-3-2-.30, 290-3-2-.31, and 290-3-2-.32. 
(h) Individuals who held a first Preliminary Certificate (PRE) prior to the 2011-2012 
scholastic year are no longer eligible for a subsequent PRE under the rules that were in effect 
at the time the first PRE was issued nor are they eligible for the second PCLS. If the three year 
alternative certificate cap as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.11(4)(a) has not been exceeded, an 
individual may meet requirements for another certification approach. 
(5) First PCLS in Library Media. 
(a) Application. 
1. The applicant is required to submit to the superintendent or administrator the 
current application for this approach and documentation of having met all requirements as 
prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.11 and on the application. 
2. The superintendent or administrator who wishes to employ the applicant to serve 
full-time as a school librarian is required to submit to the Educator Certification Section: 
(i) A recommendation on the current application for this approach no later than 
October 1 of the scholastic year for which the PCLS is requested. 
156 
===PAGE 59===
     
  
   
 
  
     
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.11(5)(a)2.(ii) 290-3-2-.11(5)(b)3.(iii)(I) 
(ii) The applicant’s current application and documentation of having met all 
requirements. 
(b) Requirements. All requirements must be successfully completed prior to 
October 1 of the scholastic year for which the first PCLS is requested. 
1. Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
2. Verification of a current passing score on the prescribed Praxis II subject area 
test(s) of the Alabama Educator Certification Assessment Program (AECAP). Additional 
information is in Rule 290-3-2-.02(9). 
3. Verification of having met one of the following options: 
(i) Option 1. Completion of an Alabama State-approved program in library media 
but lacking the required two full years of full-time professional educational work experience . 
This option will no longer be available beginning the 2021-2022 scholastic year. 
(I) At least a valid Class B Professional Educator Certificate in a teaching field, a 
valid Class A Professional Educator Certificate in a teaching field or another area of 
instructional support, or a valid Class A Professional Leadership Certificate as prescribed in 
the Educator Preparation Chapter of the Alabama Administrative Code. 
(II) Verification on the current application form for the State-Approved Program 
Approach as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.33 that: 
I. The applicant was unconditionally admitted to a Class A State-approved program 
in library media prior to July 1, 2017; and 
II. The applicant completed a Class A State-approved program in library media with 
a minimum overall grade point average (GPA) of at least 3.0. 
(III) Verification on an official transcript of at least an earned master’s degree from a 
regionally accredited senior institution.  
(ii) Option 2. Holding a valid master’s degree level or higher professional educator 
certificate in library media from another state but lacking the required two full years of full-
time professional educational work experience. 
(I) Verification of the applicant’s valid master’s degree level or higher professional 
educator certificate in library media issued by another state, the District of Columbia, a U.S. 
Territory, or the Department of Defense Education Activity (DoDEA) through submission of 
one of the following: 
I. The original professional educator certificate. 
II. Supplement CER completed by the certificate issuing authority. 
(II) Verification on official transcript(s) of all degrees earned. 
(III) Verification on an official transcript(s) of at least an earned master’s degree from 
a regionally accredited senior institution. 
(iii) Option 3. Master’s degree or higher in library science or library information 
systems. 
(I) Verification on official transcript(s) of all degrees earned. 
157 
===PAGE 60===
   
        
         
   
--
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.11(5)(b)3.(iii)(II) 290-3-2-.11(6)(b)3.(i)(I) 
(II) Verification on an official transcript(s) of at least an earned master’s degree in 
library science or library information systems from a regionally accredited senior institution. 
Verification on an official transcript of an earned education specialist degree or doctoral degree 
in library science or library information systems from a regionally accredited senior institution 
may also meet the degree requirement. 
I. The master’s or higher degree must be posted with a minimum overall grade point 
average (GPA) of at least 3.0. For issuance of the first PRE with a valid period beginning   
July 1, 2017, and thereafter, the master’s or higher degree must be posted with a 
minimum overall GPA of at least 3.25 . The overall GPA is the GPA posted on the official 
transcript of the degree granting institution that was used as the basis for granting the degree. 
II. The GPA requirement does not apply to an applicant holding a valid Class A or 
Class AA Professional Educator Certificate or Professional Leadership Certificate. 
4. An assigned mentor as required in Rule 290-3-2-.01(29). 
(6) First PCLS in School Counseling. 
(a) Application. 
1. The applicant is required to submit to the superintendent or administrator the 
current application for this approach and documentation of having met all requirements as 
prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.11 and on the application. 
2. The superintendent or administrator who wishes to employ the applicant to serve 
full-time, as a school counselor is required to submit to the Educator Certification Section: 
(i) A recommendation on the current application for this approach no later than 
October 1 of the scholastic year for which the PCLS is requested. 
(ii) The applicant’s current application and documentation of having met all 
requirements. 
(b) Requirements. All requirements must be successfully completed prior to 
October 1 of the scholastic year for which the first PCLS is requested. 
1. Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
2. Verification of a current passing score on the prescribed Praxis II subject area 
test(s) of the Alabama Educator Certification Assessment Program (AECAP). Additional 
information is in Rule 290-3-2-.02(9). 
3. Verification of having met one of the following options: 
(i) Option 1 . Completion of an Alabama State-approved program in school 
counseling but lacking the required two full years of full-time professional educational work 
experience. This option will no longer be available beginning the 2021-2022 scholastic 
year.  
(I) At least a valid Class B Professional Educator Certificate in a teaching field, a 
valid Class A Professional Educator Certificate in a teaching field or another area of 
instructional support, or a valid Class A Professional Leadership Certificate as prescribed in 
the Educator Preparation Chapter of the Alabama Administrative Code. 
158 
===PAGE 61===
 
   
 
 
 
  
--
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.11(6)(b)3.(i)(II) 290-3-2-.11(7)(a)2. 
(II) Verification on the current application form for the State-Approved Program 
Approach as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.33 that: 
I. The applicant was unconditionally admitted to a Class A State-approved program 
in school counseling prior to July 1, 2017; and 
II. The applicant completed a Class A State-approved program in school counseling 
with a minimum overall grade point average (GPA) of at least 3.0. 
(III) Verification on an official transcript of at least an earned master’s degree from a 
regionally accredited senior institution.  
(ii) Option 2. Holding a valid master’s degree level or higher professional educator 
certificate in school counseling from another state but lacking the required two full years of 
full-time professional educational work experience. 
(I) Verification of the applicant’s valid master’s degree level or higher professional 
educator certificate in school counseling issued by another state, the District of Columbia, a 
U.S. Territory, or the Department of Defense Education Activity (DoDEA) through submission 
of one of the following: 
I. The original professional educator certificate. 
II. Supplement CER completed by the certificate issuing authority. 
(II) Verification on official transcript(s) of all degrees earned. 
(III) Verification on an official transcript(s) of at least an earned master’s degree from 
a regionally accredited senior institution. 
(iii) Option 3. Master’s degree or higher in an area of counseling other than school 
counseling. 
(I) Verification on official transcript(s) of all degrees earned. 
(II) Verification on an official transcript(s) of at least an earned master’s degree in an 
area of counseling other than school counseling from a regionally accredited senior institution. 
Verification on an official transcript of an earned education specialist or doctoral degree in an 
area of counseling other than school counseling from a regionally accredited senior institution 
may also meet the degree requirement. 
(III) Verification of a valid license as an Associate Licensed Counselor (ALC) or a 
Licensed Professional Counselor (LPC) issued by a state board of examiners in counseling. 
4. An assigned mentor as required in Rule 290-3-2-.01(29). 
(7) Second PCLS in Library Media or School Counseling. 
(a) Application. 
1. The applicant is required to submit to the superintendent or administrator the 
current application for this approach and documentation of having met all requirements as 
prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.11 and on the application. 
2. The superintendent or administrator who wishes to employ the applicant to serve 
full-time, in the area of instructional support for which the first PCLS was issued is required to 
submit to the Educator Certification Section: 
159 
===PAGE 62===
     
 
    
   
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.11(7)(a)2.(i) 290-3-2-.11 History 
(i) A recommendation on the current application for this approach no later than 
October 1 of the scholastic year for which the PCLS is requested. 
(ii) The applicant’s current application and documentation of having met all 
requirements. 
(b) Requirements. All requirements must be successfully completed prior to 
October 1 of the scholastic year for which the second PCLS is requested. 
1. Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in 
Rule 290-3-2 .02(4). 
2. Verification on Supplement EXP of professional educational work experience as 
follows: 
(i) For library media: 
(I) A full scholastic year of full-time professional educational work experience as a 
school librarian while holding the first PCLS in library media; or 
(II) At least one full semester of full-time professional educational work experience 
as a school librarian while holding the first PRE in library media valid for the 2013-2014, 
2014-2015, or 2015-2016 scholastic year, except as noted in Rule 290-3-2-.15(1)(e) of 
Supplement Number 10-4 of the Educator Certification Chapter of the Alabama Administrative 
Code. 
(ii) For school counseling: 
(I) A full scholastic year of full-time professional educational work experience as a 
school counselor while holding the first PCLS in school counseling; or 
(II) At least one full semester of full-time professional educational work experience 
as a school counselor while holding the first PRE in school counseling valid for the 2013-2014, 
2014-2015, or 2015-2016 scholastic year, except as noted in Rule 290-3-2-.15(1)(e) of 
Supplement Number 10-4 of the Educator Certification Chapter of the Alabama Administrative 
Code. 
3. An assigned mentor as required in Rule 290-3-2-.01(29). 
(8) Degree Level. 
(a) If using Option 1, the certificate shall be issued at the master’s degree level. 
(b) If using Option 2, the certificate shall be issued at the highest degree level of the 
certificate held in that area from another state. 
(c) If using Option 3, the certificate shall be issued at the level of the applicant’s 
highest earned degree (master’s, education specialist, but not doctoral) from a regionally 
accredited senior institution with a major in the area of instructional support. 
(9) Valid Period. The certificate shall be valid for one scholastic year (July 1 to 
June 30). 
(10) Professional Educator Certificate. The applicant must apply for the 
Professional Educator Certificate. Information pertaining to this approach may be found in 
Rule 290-3-2-.13.  
Author: Dr. Thomas R. Bice. 
Statutory Authority: Ala. Const. Amend. 284, Ala. Code §§16-3-11, 16-23-1 and 16-23-2 (1975). 
History: Adopted new, 8-4-08, effective 9-18-08; repealed and adopted new 12-9-10, effective 1-14-11; emergency Rule to 
repeal filed 11-14 -13; repealed and adopted new 1-17- 14, effective 2-21-14; repealed and adopted new 3-10-16, effective 
4-24-16. 
160 
===PAGE 63===
 
 
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.12 290-3-2-.12(3)(b) 
290-3-2-.12 Business and Industry to Educational Administrator Certificate (BIEA) 
Approach. 
(1) Overview. When no other certification approach is applicable, a superintendent 
who wishes to employ an individual as an educational administrator, or the chairperson of the 
Board of Education of a public school system that wishes to employ an individual as a 
superintendent, may request a Business and Industry to Educational Administrator Certificate 
(BIEA). The individual must be employed full-time in the area of educational administration 
while completing the requirements of the BIEA approach to earn at least a Class A Professional 
Leadership Certificate. A BIEA is available only in educational administration. 
(2) General Information. 
(a) An individual must complete two full scholastic years of full-time professional 
educational work experience in the area of educational administration while holding the valid 
BIEA in no more than two public school systems within the four scholastic years from the July 
1 beginning date of the first BIEA.  
(b) An individual who holds a valid BIEA must be assigned only to the area of 
educational administration. 
(c) The superintendent, or chairperson of the Board of Education if the applicant is 
serving as the superintendent, must monitor the applicant’s compliance with the requirements 
of the BIEA approach.    
(d) An individual who held the first Preliminary Certificate Through Exception           
(PRE EX) in instructional leadership, school counseling, or a teaching field valid for the 
2013-2014, 2014-2015, or 2015-2016 scholastic year may be issued the second PRE EX in the 
same area if all requirements have been met. The individual must meet requirements 
prescribed on the individual’s application for the first PRE EX. 
1. An individual who held the first PRE EX valid for the 2013-2014 scholastic 
year may be issued the second PRE EX valid for the 2016-2017 scholastic year. 
2. An individual who held the first PRE EX valid for the 2014-2015 scholastic 
year may be issued the second PRE EX valid for the 2016-2017 or 2017-2018 scholastic year. 
3. An individual who held the first PRE EX valid for the 2015-2016 scholastic 
year may be issued the second PRE EX valid for the 2016-2017, 2017-2018, or 2018-2019 
scholastic year. 
(3) Limitations on Issuance.  
(a) An individual may not be employed for more than three scholastic years on the 
basis of holding an Alternative Baccalaureate-Level Certificate, a Career and Technical 
Alternative Baccalaureate-Level Certificate, a Preliminary Certificate, a Preliminary 
Certificate Through Exception, a Special Alternative Certificate, a Provisional Certificate, an 
Interim Employment Certificate, a Business and Industry to Educational Administrator 
Certificate, an alternative-approach certificate issued by another state or issuing authority, or 
any combination thereof. 
(b) A BIEA is only valid for employment with the public school system to which 
the BIEA was issued. 
161 
===PAGE 64===
  
 
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.12(3)(c) 290-3-2-.12(4)(b)4. 
(c) An individual who has not completed all requirements for Professional 
Leadership Certification through this approach by the expiration date of the second BIEA shall 
no longer be eligible for certification through the BIEA approach.  
(d) An individual who earns a Professional Educator Certificate or Professional 
Leadership Certificate in the area for which the alternative certificates were issued may be 
eligible to follow an alternative approach to earning a Professional Educator Certificate or 
Professional Leadership Certificate in another area. 
(e) A BIEA in educational administration will not be considered for an individual 
who is eligible to earn a Professional Leadership Certificate through another approach. 
(f) Individuals who held a first Preliminary Certificate Through Exception (PRE 
EX) prior to the 2011-2012 scholastic year are no longer eligible for a subsequent PRE EX 
under the rules that were in effect at the time the first PRE EX was issued nor are they eligible 
for the second BIEA. The individual may meet requirements of another certification approach. 
(4) First BIEA in Educational Administration. 
(a) Application. 
1. The applicant is required to submit to the superintendent, or to the chairperson 
of the Board of Education if the applicant is to serve as superintendent, the current application 
for this approach and documentation of having met all requirements as prescribed in 
Rule 290-3-2-.12 and on the application. 
2. The superintendent, or the chairperson of the Board of Education if the 
applicant is to serve as superintendent, who wishes to employ the applicant to serve full-time 
in the area of educational administration is required to submit to the Educator Certification 
Section: 
(i) A recommendation on the current application for this approach no later than      
October 1 of the scholastic year for which the BIEA is requested. 
(ii) The
 applicant’s current application and documentation of having met all 
requirements. 
(b) Requirements. All requirements must be successfully completed prior to 
October 1 of the scholastic year for which the first BIEA is requested. 
1. Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
2. Verification of a current passing score on the prescribed Praxis II subject area 
test(s) of the Alabama Educator Certification Assessment Program (AECAP). Additional 
information is in Rule 290-3-2-.02(9). 
3. Verification on official transcript(s) of all degrees earned. 
4. Verification on an official transcript(s) of at least an earned master’s degree 
from a regionally accredited senior institution. Verification on an official transcript of an 
earned education specialist degree or doctoral degree from a regionally accredited senior 
institution may also meet the degree requirement. 
162 
===PAGE 65===
       
        
  
   
  
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.12(4)(b)4.(i) 290-3-2-.12(5)(b)3.(ii) 
(i) The master’s or higher degree must be posted with a minimum overall grade 
point average (GPA) of at least 3.0. For issuance of the first BIEA with a valid period 
beginning July 1, 2017, and thereafter, the master’s or higher degree must be posted with 
a minimum overall GPA of at least 3.25. The overall GPA is the GPA posted on the official 
transcript of the degree granting institution that was used as the basis for granting the degree. 
(ii) The GPA requirement does not apply to an applicant holding a valid Class A or 
Class AA Professional Educator Certificate or Professional Leadership Certificate. 
5. Verification on official transcript(s) from a regionally accredited senior 
institution of credit earned in the areas of diversity, ethics, financial management, human 
resource management, nonhuman resource management, planning, public relations, and 
technology. 
6. Verification of having attained, within the ten years immediately preceding        
October 1 of the calendar year during which the certificate is to become valid, a minimum of 
five years of leadership experience in a compensated executive, management, supervisory, or 
leadership position in a business and industry entity or field other than education. Supplement 
BIEA must be submitted. 
7. An assigned mentor as required in Rule 290-3-2-.01(29). 
(5) Second BIEA in Educational Administration.  
(a) Application. 
1. The applicant is required to submit to the superintendent, or to the chairperson 
of the Board of Education if the applicant is to serve as superintendent, the current application 
for this approach and documentation of having met all requirements as prescribed in 
Rule 290-3-2-.12 and on the application. 
2. The superintendent, or the chairperson of the Board of Education if the 
applicant is to serve as superintendent, who wishes to employ the applicant to serve full-time 
in the area of educational administration is required to submit to the Educator Certification 
Section: 
(i) A recommendation on the current application for this approach no later than     
October 1 of the scholastic year for which the BIEA is requested. 
(ii) The applicant’s current application and documentation of having met all 
requirements. 
(b) Requirements. All requirements must be successfully completed prior to 
October 1 of the scholastic year for which the second BIEA is requested. 
1. Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
2. Verification on Supplement EXP of a full scholastic year of full-time 
professional educational work experience in the area of educational administration while 
holding the first BIEA in educational administration. 
3. Verification of completion of: 
(i) Superintendent’s Academy for applicants serving in an educational 
administration role other than the superintendent, or 
(ii) Superintendent’s Professional Development Program for applicants serving as 
the superintendent. 
163 
===PAGE 66===
   
     
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.12(5)(b)4. 290-3-2-.12 History 
4. An assigned mentor as required in Rule 290-3-2-.01(29).   
(6) Degree Level. A BIEA shall  be issued at the master’s or education specialist 
level based upon the applicant’s highest earned degree from a regionally accredited senior 
institution.  
(7) Valid Period. The certificate shall be valid for one scholastic year (July 1 to 
June 30). 
(8) Professional Leadership Certificate. The applicant must apply for the 
Professional Leadership Certificate. Information pertaining to this approach may be found in 
Rule 290-3-2-.13. 
Author: Dr. Thomas R. Bice. 
Statutory Authority: Ala. Const. Amend. 284, Ala. Code §§16-3-11, 16-23-1 and 16-23-2 (1975). 
History: Adopted new, 8-4-08, effective 9-18-08; repealed and adopted new 12-9-10, effective 1-14-11; emergency Rule to 
repeal filed 11-14 -13; repealed and adopted new 1-17- 14, effective 2-21-14; repealed and adopted new 3-10-16, effective 
4-24-16. 
164 
===PAGE 67===
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION  
290-3-2-.13 290-3-2-.13(5) 
290-3-2-.13 Professional Certification Following the Provisional Certificate in Library 
Media or School Counseling (PCLS) or Business and Industry to Educational 
Administrator (BIEA) Approach. 
(1) Overview. An individual who has held the first and second PCLS and/or PRE or 
BIEA and/or PRE EX may meet requirements for a Professional Educator or Professional 
Leadership Certificate in the same area and grade level for which the two PCLSs/PREs or 
BIEA/PRE EXs were issued. 
(2) Limitations on Issuance. An individual who does not apply by October 1 of the 
calendar year during which the second PCLS, PRE EX, or BIEA expires will forfeit the right 
to seek a Professional Educator or Professional Leadership Certificate through this approach. 
(3) Application. 
(a) The applicant is required to submit to the Educator Certification Section the 
current application for this approach and documentation of having met all requirements as 
prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.13 and on the application. 
(b) The application must be received in the Educator Certification Section no later 
than October 1 of the calendar year during which the second PCLS, PRE EX, or BIEA expires 
as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.13(2). 
(4) Requirements for Issuance of the Professional Educator or Professional 
Leadership Certificate. 
(a) Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
(b) For library media and school counseling: verification on Supplement EXP of a 
full scholastic year of full-time professional educational work experience, in the area for which 
the second PCLS was issued, while holding the second PCLS. 
(c) For educational administration: verification on Supplement EXP of a full 
scholastic year of full-time professional educational work experience, in the area of educational 
administration while holding the second BIEA in educational administration. 
(d) For individuals who held the first PRE or first PRE EX valid for the 2013-2014,    
2014-2015, or 2015-2016 scholastic year: verification of professional educational work 
experience as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.15(8) of Supplement Number 14-1 of the Educator 
Certification Chapter of the Alabama Administrative Code and on the individual’s application 
for the first PRE or first PRE EX.   
(5) Alabama Educator Certification Assessment Program (AECAP). The 
applicant must meet the requirements of the AECAP for this approach. 
165 
===PAGE 68===
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION  
290-3-2-.13(6) 290-3-2-.13 History 
(6) Degree Level. The Professional Educator Certificate issued through this 
approach shall be issued at the degree level of the PCLS, PRE, or PRE EX certificates held. 
The Professional Leadership Certificate will be issued at the degree level of the BIEA 
certificates held. 
(7) Valid Period. The valid period of the certificate shall be from the date of 
issuance through the remainder of the same scholastic year, and thereafter, for the next five 
consecutive scholastic years. 
Author: Dr. Thomas R. Bice 
Statutory Authority: Ala. Const. Amend. 284, Ala. Code §§16-3-11, 16-23-1 and 16-23-2 (1975). 
History: Adopted new, 8-4-08, effective 9-18-08; repealed and adopted new 3-10-16, effective 4-24-16. 
166 
===PAGE 69===
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.14 290-3-2-.14(4)(d) 
290-3-2-.14 Career and Technical Education Additional Teaching Field Approach Based 
on a Professional Educator Certificate, Experience, and an Occupational 
Proficiency Assessment. 
(1) Overview. An individual may seek additional certification in selected secondary 
(6-12) technical education program areas or health science if a valid Alabama Professional 
Educator Certificate in a teaching field is held, appropriate experience is verified, and the 
appropriate occupational proficiency assessment (test scores, license, or credential) is passed.  
Evaluation and approval by the Office of Career and Technical Education of the Department 
is required prior to issuance of the certificate. 
(2) Limitations on Issuance. 
(a) This approach is not available to an individual who holds only a valid 
Professional Educator Certificate in an area of instructional support or a Professional 
Leadership Certificate. 
(b) This approach is not available to an individual who holds only a Provisional 
Certificate, Interim Employment Certificate, Business and Industry to Educational 
Administrator Certificate, Career and Technical (Level, Type, Specialty Area, Degree 
Equivalent, and/or Temporary) Certificate, Speech-Language Pathology Assistant Certificate, 
Speech-Language Pathology Temporary Certificate, Speech-Language Pathology Professional 
Educator Certificate, Child Nutrition Program Director Certificate, Junior Reserve Officer 
Training Corps (JROTC) Certificate, Emergency Certificate, or Substitute License.   
(c) Additional certification is available only in health science and the technical 
education program areas listed on the current application for this approach. 
(3) Application for the Professional Educator Certificate. The applicant is 
required to submit to the Educator Certification Section the current application for this 
approach and documentation of having met all requirements as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.14 
and on the application. 
(4) Requirements. All requirements must be successfully completed prior to the 
date the application is received in the Educator Certification Section. 
(a) Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
(b) A valid Professional Educator Certificate in a teaching field as prescribed in 
Rule 290-3-2-.03. 
(c) Verification of two full scholastic years of full-time classroom teaching experience 
within a P-12 setting. Partial years cannot be combined to meet this requirement. Experience 
must be verified on Supplement EXP.  
(d) Verification of a passing score on the appropriate Department-approved 
occupational proficiency assessment (test score, license, or credential). Information on the 
approved occupational proficiency assessments can be obtained from the Office of Career and 
Technical Education of the Department. 
167 
===PAGE 70===
 
--
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.14(4)(e) 290-3-2-.14 History 
(e) Verification of successful completion of Session A of the Career and Technical 
Education Teacher Certification Program (CTE TCP). Session A of the CTE TCP is not 
required for holders of a valid Professional Educator Certificate in a career and technical 
education teaching field, a valid Specialty Area Career and Technical Certificate, or a valid 
Degree Equivalent Career and Technical Certificate. Successful completion must be verified 
by submission of one of the following: 
1. Department-approved professional development training history. 
2. Certificate of completion. 
(5) Degree Level. The Secondary Professional Educator Certificate issued through 
this approach shall be issued only at the Class B (bachelor’s degree) level. 
(6) Valid Period. The valid period of the certificate shall be from the date of 
issuance through the remainder of the same scholastic year, and thereafter, for the next five 
consecutive scholastic years.  
Author: Dr. Thomas R. Bice 
Statutory Authority: Ala. Const. Amend. 284, Ala. Code §§16-3-11, 16-23-1 and 16-23-2 (1975). 
History: Adopted new, 6-14-12, effective 7-19-12; emergency Rule to repeal filed 11-14 -13; repealed and adopted new 1 -
17-14, effective 2-21-14; repealed and adopted new 3-10-16, effective 4-10-16. 
168 
===PAGE 71===
    
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.15 290-3-2-.15(4)(d) 
290-3-2.15 Career and Technical Education Additional Certification in Cooperative 
Education Coordination Approach. 
(1) Overview. An individual may seek additional certification in Cooperative 
Education Coordination for Grades 6-12 if a valid Alabama Professional Educator Certificate 
in a career and technical education teaching field is held, appropriate experience is verified, 
and credit earned in an approved cooperative education coordinator preparation course is 
verified. Evaluation and approval by the Office of Career and Technical Education of the 
Department is required prior to issuance of the certificate. 
(2) Limitations on Issuance. 
(a) This approach is not available to an individual who holds only a valid 
Professional Educator Certificate in a teaching field other than a career and technical education 
teaching field or only a valid Professional Educator Certificate in an area of instructional 
support, a Speech-Language Pathology Professional Educator Certificate, or a Professional 
Leadership Certificate. 
(b) This approach is not available to an individual who holds only a Provisional 
Certificate, Interim Employment Certificate, Business and Industry to Educational 
Administrator Certificate, Career and Technical (Level, Type, Specialty Area, Degree 
Equivalent, and/or Temporary) Certificate, Speech-Language Pathology Assistant Certificate, 
Speech-Language Pathology Temporary Certificate, Child Nutrition Program Director 
Certificate, Junior Reserve Officer Training Corps (JROTC) Certificate, Emergency 
Certificate, or Substitute License.   
(3) Application for the Professional Educator Certificate. The applicant is 
required to submit to the Educator Certification Section the current application for this 
approach and documentation of having met all requirements as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.15 
and on the application. 
(4) Requirements. All requirements must be successfully completed prior to the 
date the application is received in the Educator Certification Section. 
(a) Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
(b) A valid Professional Educator Certificate in a career and technical education 
teaching field as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.03. 
(c) Verification on an official transcript of e arned credit, with a grade of “C” or 
above, in an approved cooperative education coordinator preparation course (Functions of the 
Coordinator, Principles of Coordination, or equivalent) at an Alabama institution with a State-
approved program in a career and technical education teaching field. 
(d) Verification of two full scholastic years of full-time classroom teaching 
experience in a career and technical education teaching field within a 6-12 setting. Partial years 
cannot be combined to meet this requirement. Experience must be verified on Supplement 
EXP.  
169 
===PAGE 72===
  
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.15(5) 290-3-2-.15 History 
(5) Degree Level. The Secondary Professional Educator Certificate issued through 
this approach shall be issued only at the Class B (bachelor’s degree) level. 
(6) Valid Period. The valid period of the certificate shall be from the date of 
issuance through the remainder of the same scholastic year, and thereafter, for the next five 
consecutive scholastic years.  
Author: Dr. Thomas R. Bice 
Statutory Authority: Ala. Const. Amend. 284, Ala. Code §§16-3-11, 16-23-1 and 16-23-2 (1975). 
History: Adopted new 3-10-16, effective 4-24-16. 
170 
===PAGE 73===
   
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.16 290-3-2-.16(5) 
290-3-2-.16 Career and Technical Education Temporary Certificate (CTE T). 
(1) Overview. In cases where an individual who holds a valid Alabama certificate 
endorsed in the appropriate technical education program area or health science is not available, 
a superintendent who wishes to employ an individual to teach may request a Career and 
Technical Education Temporary Certificate (CTE T) in health science or the technical 
education program area to be taught. A superintendent who has established a partnership with 
a business or governmental agency and wishes for an employee of that business or 
governmental agency to teach, may request a CTE T in health science or in the technical 
education program area to be taught. The CTE T is not an alternative certificate. Evaluation 
and approval by the Office of Career and Technical Education of the Department is required 
prior to issuance of the certificate. 
(2) Limitations on Issuance. 
(a) A CTE T is issued for only one technical education program area or health 
science. 
(b) Effective beginning with the 2016-2017 scholastic year, an individual who 
holds or previously held an Emergency Certificate in health science or in a technical education 
program area is not eligible to receive a CTE T in the same area. 
(c) An individual who has held one CTE T is not eligible to receive another CTE T 
in any technical education program area or health science. 
(3)    Application.  
(a) The applicant is required to submit to the superintendent the current application 
for this approach and documentation of having met all requirements as prescribed in 
Rule 290-3-2-.16 and on the application. 
(b) The superintendent who wishes to employ the applicant or wishes for the 
applicant, who is an employee of a business or governmental agency with which a partnership 
has been established, to teach health science or in the technical education program area for 
which a certificate is sought is required to submit to the Educator Certification Section: 
1. A recommendation requesting issuance of the Career and Technical Education 
Temporary Certificate. 
2. The applicant’s current application and documentation of having met all 
requirements. 
(4) Requirements. All requirements must be successfully completed prior to the 
date the application is received in the Educator Certification Section. 
(a) Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
(b) For the CTE T in the technical education program area of cosmetology, 
verification of a valid Alabama Cosmetology Instructor license is required. 
(c) For the CTE T in health science, verification of an active Alabama license in a 
registered nursing, paramedical, or an approved allied health specialty is required.  
(5) Degree Level.  The CTE T shall not be issued at a degree level. 
171 
===PAGE 74===
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.16(6) 290-3-2-.16 History 
(6) Valid Period. The valid period of the CTE T shall be no more than one scholastic 
year (July 1 to June 30). The CTE T will be valid from the date the certificate is issued through 
June 30 of the scholastic year for which it is issued. The CTE T shall not be continued, 
renewed, reinstated, or reissued. 
Author: Dr. Thomas R. Bice 
Statutory Authority: Ala. Const. Amend. 284, Ala. Code §§16-3-11, 16-23-1 and 16-23-2 (1975). 
History: Adopted new, 6-14-12, effective 7-19-12; emergency Rule to amend filed 6-13-13; amended Rule adopted 8-8-13, 
effective 9-12-13; emergency Rule to repeal filed 11- 14-13; repealed and adopted new 1-17- 14, effective 2-21-14; repealed 
and adopted new 3-10-16, effective 4-24-16. 
172 
===PAGE 75===
    
  
    
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.17 290-3-2-.17(2)(b)4.(i)(II) 
290-3-2-.17 Degree Equivalent Health Science Certificate Approach. 
(1) Overview.  This approach was previously named the Specialty Area Career and 
Technical Certificate in Health Science Approach. An individual may seek a Degree 
Equivalent Health Science Certificate for Grades 6-12. These certificates are Career and 
Technical Certificates. 
(2) Bachelor’s Equivalent Health Science 1 Certificate. 
(a) Application. 
1. The applicant is required to submit to the superintendent the current application 
for this approach and documentation of having met all requirements as prescribed in 
Rule 290-3-2-.17 and on the application. 
2. The superintendent who wishes to employ the applicant or wishes for the 
applicant, who is an employee of a business or governmental agency with which a partnership 
has been established, to teach health science is required to submit to the Educator Certification 
Section: 
(i) A recommendation requesting issuance of the Bachelor’s Equivalent Health 
Science 1 Certificate. 
(ii) The applicant’s current application and documentation of having met all 
requirements. 
(b) Requirements. 
1. Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
2. Verification of an active Alabama license in registered nursing, paramedical, or 
an approved allied health specialty. The active license must have been attained prior to the date 
the application is received in the Educator Certification Section. 
3. Verification of current passing scores for the basic skills assessments of the 
Alabama Educator Certification Assessment Program (AECAP) on a test administration date 
prior to the date the application is received in the Educator Certification Section. This 
requirement does not apply to an applicant holding a valid Specialty Area Certificate, a valid 
Professional Educator Certificate, or a valid Professional Leadership Certificate. 
4. Education and work experience through one of the following options: 
(i) Option 1. 
(I) Verification on an official transcript(s) that an associate’s degree, in a healthcare 
or related area, was earned from a regionally accredited postsecondary institution prior to the 
date the application is received in the Educator Certification Section. The Office of Career and 
Technical Education of the Department must approve the healthcare or related area. 
(II) Verification of having attained, within the seven years immediately prior to the 
date the application is received in the Educator Certification Section, a minimum of 6,000 
clock hours (three years) of acceptable full-time work experience as prescribed in 
Rule 290-3-2-.17(7). 
173 
===PAGE 76===
   
    
  
  
   
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.17(2)(b)4.(ii) 290-3-2-.17(3)(c) 
(ii) Option 2. 
(I) Verification on an official transcript(s) that a bachelor’s or higher degree, with an 
academic major in a healthcare or related area, was earned from a regionally accredited senior 
institution prior to the date the application is received in the Educator Certification Section. 
The Office of Career and Technical Education of the Department must approve the healthcare 
or related area. 
(II) Verification of having attained, within the five years immediately prior to the date 
the application is received in the Educator Certification Section, a minimum of 4,000 clock 
hours (two years) of acceptable full-time work experience as prescribed in 
Rule 290-3-2-.17(7). 
(c)  Evaluation. Evaluation and approval by the Office of Career and Technical 
Education of the Department is required prior to issuance of the certificate. 
(3) Bachelor’s Equivalent Health Science 2 Certificate. 
(a) Application. The applicant is required to submit to the Educator Certification 
Section the current application for this approach and documentation of having met all 
requirements as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.17 and on the application. 
(b) Requirements. All requirements must be successfully completed prior to the 
date the application is received in the Educator Certification Section. 
1. Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
2. One of the following: 
(i) A valid, or eligibility to hold a valid, Bachelor’s Equivalent Health Science 1 
Certificate. 
(ii) A valid Specialty Area 1 Career and Technical Certificate in Health Science. 
3. Verification of an active Alabama license in registered nursing, paramedical, or 
an approved allied health specialty. 
4. Verification of current passing scores for the basic skills assessments of the 
AECAP. This requirement is effective if the Bachelor’s Equivalent Health Science 2 Certificate 
is the applicant’s initial Health Science Certificate. This requirement does not apply to an 
applicant holding a valid Degree Equivalent Health Science Certificate, a valid Specialty Area 
Certificate, a valid Professional Educator Certificate, or a valid Professional Leadership 
Certificate. 
5. Verification of successful completion of the Career and Technical Education 
Teacher Certification Program (CTE TCP) by submission of one of the following: 
(i) Department-approved professional development training history. 
(ii) Certificate of completion. 
(c)  Evaluation. Evaluation and approval by the Office of Career and Technical 
Education of the Department is required prior to issuance of the certificate. 
174 
===PAGE 77===
    
  
  
  
 
 
SUPP. NO. 16-1             EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.17(4) 290-3-2-.17(4)(b)5.(ii) 
(4) Master’s Equivalent Health Science 3 Certificate. 
(a) Application. The applicant is required to submit to the Educator Certification 
Section the current application for this approach and documentation of having met all 
requirements as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.17 and on the application. 
(b) Requirements. All requirements must be successfully completed prior to the 
date the application is received in the Educator Certification Section. 
1. Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
2. One of the following: 
(i) A valid, or eligibility to hold a valid, Bachelor’s Equivalent Health Science 2 
Certificate. 
(ii) A valid Specialty Area 2 Career and Technical Certificate in Health Science. 
(iii) A valid Type II or III Career and Technical Certificate in Health Science. 
3. Verification of an active Alabama license in registered nursing, paramedical, or 
an approved allied health specialty. 
4. Verification of current passing scores for the basic skills assessments of the 
AECAP. This requirement is effective if the Master’s Equivalent Health Science 3 Certificate 
is the applicant’s initial Health Science Certificate. This requirement does not ap ply to an 
applicant holding a valid Degree Equivalent Health Science Certificate, a valid Specialty Area 
Certificate, a valid Professional Educator Certificate, or a valid Professional Leadership 
Certificate. 
5. Completion of one of the following: 
(i) Verification on an official transcript(s) that an associate’s degree, in a healthcare 
or related area, was earned from a regionally accredited postsecondary institution. The Office 
of Career and Technical Education of the Department must approve the healthcare or related 
area. 
(ii) Verification on an official transcript(s) of at least an earned bachelor’s degree 
with an academic major in a healthcare or related area from a regionally accredited senior 
institution. The Office of Career and Technical Education of the Department must approve the 
healthcare or related area. 
175 
===PAGE 78===
   
  
  
 
SUPP. NO. 16-1             EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.17(4)(b)6.    290-3-2-.17(4)(c) 
6. Verification on an official transcript(s) of earned credit, with a grade of “C” or 
above, for three courses through one of the following three options: 
(i) Option 1. If the Career and Technical Education Teacher Certification Program 
(CTE TCP) was completed and used to meet requirements for the Bachelor’s Equivalent Health 
Science 2 Certificate or the Specialty Area 2 Career and Technical Certificate in health science, 
the following three courses are required:  
Required Courses Number of Courses 
Classroom Management a 1 
Methods of Teaching Career and Technical Education b 1 
Strategies for Teaching Special Needs Students in Inclusive Settings a 1 
a These courses must be completed at an Alabama institution with a State-approved program. 
b This course must be completed at an Alabama institution with a State-approved program in a career and technical 
education teaching field. 
(ii) Option 2. If the CTE TCP was completed and used to meet requirements for the 
Bachelor’s Equivalent Health Science 2 Certificate or the Specialty Area 2 Career and Technical 
Certificate in health science, the following three courses must be completed prior to 
July 1, 2017, and the application must be received in the Educator Certification Section prior 
to July 1, 2017: 
Required Courses Number of Courses 
Principles of Career and Technical Educationa 1 
Safetya 1 
Career and Technical Student Organizationsa 1 
a This course must be completed at an Alabama institution with a State-approved program in a career and technical 
education teaching field. 
(iii) Option 3. If the CTE TCP was not used to meet requirements for the Bachelor’s 
Equivalent Health Science 2 Certificate or the Specialty Area 2 Career and Technical 
Certificate in health science, the following three courses must be completed prior to 
July 1, 2025, and the application must be received in the Educator Certification Section prior 
to July 1, 2025:   
Required Courses Number of Courses 
Principles of Career and Technical Educationa 1 
Safetya 1 
Career and Technical Student Organizationsa 1 
a This course must be completed at an Alabama institution with a State-approved program in a career and technical 
education teaching field. 
(c) Evaluation. Evaluation and approval by the Office of Career and Technical 
Education of the Department is required prior to issuance of the certificate. 
176 
===PAGE 79===
  
  
 
---
SUPP. NO. 16-1             EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.17(5)      290-3-2-.17(6) 
(5) Sixth-Year Equivalent Health Science 4 Certificate. 
(a) Application. The applicant is required to submit to the Educator Certification 
Section the current application for this approach and documentation of having met all 
requirements as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.17 and on the application. 
(b) Requirements. All requirements must be successfully completed prior to the 
date the application is received in the Educator Certification Section. 
1. Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
2. One of the following: 
(i) A valid, or eligibility to hold a valid, Master’s Equivalent Health Science 3 Career 
and Technical Certificate. 
(ii) A valid Specialty Area 4 Career and Technical Certificate in Health Science. 
3. Verification of an active Alabama license in registered nursing, paramedical, or 
an approved allied health specialty. 
4. Verification of current passing scores for the basic skills assessments of the 
AECAP. This requirement is effective if the Sixth-Year Equivalent Health Science 4 Certificate 
is the applicant’s initial Health Science Certificate. This requirement does not apply to an 
applicant holding a valid Degree Equivalent Health Science Certificate, a valid Specialty Area 
Certificate, a valid Professional Educator Certificate, or a valid Professional Leadership 
Certificate. 
5. Verification on an official transcript(s) of at least an earned master’s degree with 
an academic major in a healthcare or related area from a regionally accredited senior 
institution. The Office of Career and Technical Education of the Department must approve the 
healthcare or related area. 
(c) Evaluation. Evaluation and approval by the Office of Career and Technical 
Education of the Department is required prior to issuance of the certificate. 
(6) Professional Educator Certification. Individuals holding at least a valid 
Master’s Equivalent Health Science 3 Certificate may be eligible for a Professional Educator 
Certificate.  Additional information may be found in Rule 290-3-2-.19. 
177 
===PAGE 80===
     
      
       
 
 
 
SUPP. NO. 16-1             EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.17(7)      290-3-2-.17(8)(c) 
(7) Full-Time Work Experience. 
(a) Acceptable full-time work experience must have been attained through one or 
more of the following: 
1. Employee in the healthcare industry in a compensated position as a healthcare 
practitioner.  The work experience must be verified with submission of: 
(i) Supplement CTV; and 
(ii) A notarized cover letter verifying the applicant’s prior work experience. The 
cover letter must be on the employer’s business/company stationery and must include at least 
a description of the nature of the business/company, a brief description of the scope and quality 
of the applicant’s work history, and the original signature of the employer or owner of the 
business/company. 
2. Self-employment in the healthcare industry as a healthcare practitioner. The 
self-employment experience must be verified with submission of: 
(i) Supplement CTV; and 
(ii) A notarized cover letter on company stationery, a copy of each business license 
held during the verification period, and notarized letters from three individuals and/or 
companies with which business or work transactions occurred during the verification period. 
3. Teaching experience at the postsecondary level in health science or a related area. 
The teaching experience must be verified on Supplement EXP. 
4. Health Science teaching experience at the secondary level while holding valid 
teacher certification in health science (see Rule 290-3-2-.17(7)(b)1. below) at the time of the 
work experience.  The teaching experience must be verified on Supplement EXP. 
(b) The following cannot be used as acceptable full-time work experience: 
1. Teaching experience in health science in grades P-12 while holding an 
Emergency Certificate, a Career and Technical Education Temporary Certificate, a Career and 
Technical Education Alternative Baccalaureate-Level Certificate, or a Provisional Certificate 
in a Career and Technical Education Teaching Field. 
2. Teaching experience in health science in grades P-12 while not holding any valid 
Alabama certificate. 
(8) Type Career and Technical Certificates. 
(a)  Upon application to the Educator Certification Section and approval by the Office 
of Career and Technical Education of the Department, an applicant holding a valid Type II or 
III Career and Technical Certificate in health science may convert the Type Certificate to a 
Bachelor’s Equivalent Health Science 2 Certificate.  
(b) A valid Type II or III Career and Technical Certificate in health science may be 
used as a prerequisite for a Master’s Equivalent Health Science 3 Certificate. 
(c)  The Type II and III Career and Technical Certificates in health science are valid 
for five years. Prior to May 1, 2016, the certificates could be continued, but could not be 
reinstated. Effective May 1, 2016, the certificates may be continued or reinstated as a 
Bachelor’s Equivalent Health Science 2 Certificate. Renewal requirements are prescribed in 
Rule 290-3-2-.29. 
178 
===PAGE 81===
 
 
SUPP. NO. 16-1             EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.17(8)(d)      290-3-2-.17(10)(c) 
(d) Type I Career and Technical Certificates in health science were issued on the 
basis of the Rules in effect prior to July 1, 1997. Prior to January 1, 2008, at the request of the 
certificate holder, a valid Type I Career and Technical Certificate in health science was 
converted to the appropriate Level 4 or 5 Career and Technical Certificate in health science as 
determined by the Office of Career and Technical Education of the Department. Type I Career 
and Technical Certificates in health science cannot be continued or reinstated. An individual 
holding an expired Type I Career and Technical Certificate in health science who is seeking a 
current Career and Technical Certificate in health science must meet requirements for the 
Bachelor’s Equivalent
 Health Science 1 Certificate as a prerequisite to Degree Equivalent 
Health Science 2, 3, or 4 Certificates.  
(9) Level Career and Technical Certificates. 
(a) Upon application to the Educator Certification Section and approval by the Office 
of Career and Technical Education of the Department, and applicant holding a valid Level 4 
or 5 Career and Technical Certificate in health science may convert the Level 4 or 5 Certificate 
to the appropriate Degree Equivalent Health Science 2, 3, or 4 Certificate. 
(b) A Level 4 or 5 Career and Technical Certificate in health science will be 
continued or reinstated as the appropriate Degree Equivalent Health Science 2, 3, or 4 
Certificate as approved by the Office of Career and Technical Education of the Department. 
Renewal requirements are prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.29. 
(c) Level 1, 2, and 3 Career and Technical Certificates in health science were 
nonrenewable certificates and cannot be continued or reinstated. An applicant holding an 
expired Level 1, 2, or 3 Career and Technical Certificates in health science who is seeking a 
current Career and Technical Certificate in health science must meet requirements for the 
Bachelor’s Equivalent Health Science 1 Certificate as a prerequisite to Degree Equivalent 
Health Science 2, 3, or 4 Certificates.  
(10) Specialty Area Career and Technical Certificates. 
(a) Upon application to the Educator Certification Section and approval by the Office 
of Career and Technical Education of the Department, an applicant holding a valid Specialty 
Area 2, 3, 4, or 5 Career and Technical Certificate in health science may convert the Specialty 
Area Certificate to the appropriate Degree Equivalent Health Science 2, 3, or 4 Certificate.  
(b) A Specialty Area 2, 3, 4, or 5 Career and Technical Certificate in health science 
may be continued or reinstated as the appropriate Degree Equivalent Health Science 2, 3, or 4 
Certificate as approved by the Office of Career and Technical Education of the Department . 
Renewal requirements are prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.29.  
(c) The Specialty Area 2 Career and Technical Certificate in health science, valid for 
five years and issued with a valid period beginning prior to July 1, 2012, was nonrenewable. 
Effective August 1, 2012, the Specialty Area 2 Career and Technical Certificate in health 
science may be continued or reinstated. 
179 
===PAGE 82===
 
     
     
     
 
 
 
           
SUPP. NO. 16-1             EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.17(10)(d)      290-3-2-.17 History 
(d) The Specialty Area 1 Career and Technical Certificate in health science was a 
nonrenewable certificate and cannot be continued or reinstated. An applicant holding an 
expired Specialty Area 1 Career and Technical Certificate in health science who is seeking a 
current Career and Technical Certificate in health science must meet requirements for the 
Bachelor’s Equivalent Health Science 1 Certificate as a prerequisite to Degree Equivalent 
Health Science 2, 3, or 4 Certificates.  
(11) Name of Certificate, Degree Equivalency, Valid Period, and Renewability. 
Name of Certificate Degree Equivalency Valid Period Renewable 
Bachelor’s Equivalent Health Science 1 Bachelor’s Minimum of 2 yearsa No 
Bachelor’s Equivalent Health Science 2 Bachelor’s Minimum of 5 yearsc Yes 
Master’s Equivalent Health Science 3 Master’s Minimum of 5 yearsc Yes 
Sixth-Year Equivalent Health Science 4 Sixth-year Minimum of 5 yearsc Yes 
Specialty Area 1 Bachelor's Minimum of 2 yearsa No 
Specialty Area 2 Bachelor's Minimum of 5 yearsb, c Yes 
Specialty Area 3 Master's cMinimum of 5 years Yes 
Specialty Area 4 Master's Minimum of 5 yearsc Yes 
Specialty Area 5 Sixth-year Minimum of 5 yearsc Yes 
Level 4 d Master’s 5 years Yes 
Level 5 d Sixth-year 5 years Yes 
Type I e Master’s 10 years No 
Type II c, f Bachelor's Minimum of 5 years Yes 
Type III c, f Bachelor's Minimum of 5 years Yes 
aBachelor’s Equivalent Health Science 1 Certificates and Specialty Area 1 Certificates are valid from the date 
of issuance through the remainder of the same scholastic year, and thereafter, for the next two consecutive 
scholastic years. 
bSpecialty Area 2 Certificates issued prior to August 1, 2012, were valid for five years and nonrenewable. 
Effective August 1, 2012, the Specialty Area 2 Certificate may be continued or reinstated. 
cThese Career and Technical Certificates are valid from the date of issuance through the remainder of the same 
scholastic year, and thereafter, for the next five consecutive scholastic years. 
dThe Level Certificates were initially issued on the basis of Rules in effect prior to September 2008. These 
certificates were converted to the appropriate Specialty Area Certificate. Expired Level 4 and 5 Certificates may 
be reinstated as the appropriate Degree Equivalent Health Science 2, 3, or 4 Certificate. 
eType I Certificates were initially issued on the basis of Rules in effect prior to July 1, 1997. These certificates 
were converted to the appropriate Level Certificate. As prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.17(8)(d), expired Type I 
Certificates cannot be reinstated. 
fType II and III Certificates were initially issued on the basis of Rules in effect prior to July 1, 1997. These 
certificates may be continued or reinstated as a Bachelor’s Equivalent Health Science 2 Certificate. 
Author: Dr. Thomas R. Bice 
Statutory Authority: Ala. Const. Amend. 284, Ala. Code §§16-3-11, 16-23-1 and 16-23-2 (1975). 
History: Adopted new, 8-4-08, effective 9-18 -08; repealed and adopted new 12-9-10, effective 1- 14-11; repealed and 
adopted new 6-14-12, effective 7-19-12; emergency Rule to amend filed 1-10-13; amended Rule adopted 3-14 -13, effective 
4-18-13; emergency Rule to amend filed 6-13-13; amended Rule adopted 8-8-13; effective 9-12-13; emergency Rule to repeal 
filed 11-14-13; repealed and adopted new 1-17-14, effective 2-21-14.; repealed and adopted new 3-10-16, effective 4-24-16. 
180 
===PAGE 83===
      
   
   
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION  
290-3-2-.18 290-3-2-.18(2)(b)3. 
290-3-2-.18 Degree Equivalent Technical Education Certificate Approach. 
(1) Overview. This approach was previously named the Specialty Area Career and 
Technical Certificate in a Technical Education Program Area Approach. An individual may 
seek a Degree Equivalent Technical Education Certificate for Grades 6-12 in selected technical 
education program areas. The specific technical education program areas are identified by the 
Office of Career and Technical Education of the Department. An example of a technical 
education program area is cosmetology and the teaching field reflected on the certificate is 
Technical Education: Cosmetology. These certificates are Career and Technical Certificates. 
(2) Bachelor’s Equivalent Technical Education 1 Certificate. 
(a) Application. 
1. The applicant is required to submit to the superintendent the current application 
for this approach and documentation of having met all requirements as prescribed in 
Rule 290-3-2-.18 and on the application. 
2. The superintendent who wishes to employ the applicant or wishes for the 
applicant, who is an employee of a business or governmental agency with which a partnership 
has been established, to teach in the technical education program area for which a certificate is 
sought is required to submit to the Educator Certification Section: 
(i) A recommendation requesting issuance of the Bachelor’s Equivalent Technical 
Education 1 Certificate in a technical education program area. 
(ii) The applicant’s current application and documentation of having met all 
requirements. 
(b) Requirements. 
1. Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
2. Verification of a passing score on the Department-approved occupational 
proficiency assessment (test score, license, or credential) for the technical education program 
area for which the certificate is sought. Information on the approved occupational proficiency 
assessments can be obtained from the Office of Career and Technical Education of the 
Department. Successful completion must be obtained prior to the date the application is 
received in the Educator Certification Section. 
3. Verification of current passing scores for the basic skills assessments of the 
Alabama Educator Certification Assessment Program (AECAP) on a test administration date 
prior to the date the application is received in the Educator Certification Section. This 
requirement does not apply to an applicant holding a valid Specialty Area Certificate, a valid 
Degree Equivalent Certificate, a valid Professional Educator Certificate, or a valid Professional 
Leadership Certificate. 
181 
===PAGE 84===
 
   
--
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION  
290-3-2-.18(2)(b)4. 290-3-2-.18(2)(b)4.(iv)(II) 
4. Education and work experience through one of the following four options: 
(i) Option 1. 
(I) Verification on an official transcript(s) of graduation from high school or high 
school equivalency prior to the date the application is received in the Educator Certification 
Section. 
(II) Verification of having attained, within the ten years immediately prior to the date 
the application is received in the Educator Certification Section, a minimum of 14,000 clock 
hours (seven years) of acceptable full-time work experience as prescribed in 
Rule 290-3-2-.18(9).  
(ii) Option 2. 
(I) Verification on an official transcript(s) that a career and technical certificate 
program, in the technical education program area to be taught, was completed at a regionall y 
accredited postsecondary institution prior to the date the application is received in the Educator 
Certification Section. The Office of Career and Technical Education of the Department must 
approve the technical education program area. 
(II) Verification of having attained, within the seven years immediately prior to the 
date the application is received in the Educator Certification Section, a minimum of 10,000 
clock hours (five years) of acceptable full-time work experience as prescribed in 
Rule 290-3-2-.18(9). 
(iii) Option 3. 
(I) Verification on an official transcript(s) that an associate’s degree, in the technical 
education program area to be taught, was earned from a regionally accredited postsecondary 
institution prior to the date the application is received in the Educator Certification Section. 
The Office of Career and Technical Education of the Department must approve the technical 
education program area. 
(II) Verification of having attained, within the seven years immediately prior to the 
date the application is received in the Educator Certification Section, a minimum of 6,000 
clock hours (three years) of acceptable full-time work experience as prescribed in 
Rule 290-3-2-.18(9). 
(iv) Option 4. 
(I) Verification on an official transcript(s) that a bachelor’s or higher degree, with an 
academic major in the technical education program area to be taught, was earned from a 
regionally accredited senior institution prior to the date the application is received in the 
Educator Certification Section. The Office of Career and Technical Education of the 
Department must approve the technical education program area. 
(II) Verification of having attained, within the three years immediately prior to the 
date the application is received in the Educator Certification Section, a minimum of 2,000 
clock hours (one year) of acceptable full-time work experience as prescribed in 
Rule 290-3-2-.18(9). 
182 
===PAGE 85===
      
     
  
     
    
--
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.18(2)(c) 290-3-2-.18(3)(c) 
(c) Evaluation. Evaluation and approval by the Office of Career and Technical 
Education of the Department is required prior to issuance of the certificate. 
(3) Bachelor’s Equivalent Technical Education 2 Certificate. 
(a) Application. The applicant is required to submit to the Educator Certification 
Section the current application for this approach and documentation of having met all 
requirements as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.18 and on the application. 
(b) Requirements. All requirements must be successfully completed prior to the 
date the application is received in the Educator Certification Section. 
1. Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
2. A valid, or eligibility to hold a valid, Bachelor’s Equivalent Technical Education 1 
Certificate in the technical education program area for which the Bachelor’s Equivalent 
Technical Education 2 Certificate is sought. 
3. Verification of a passing score on the Department-approved occupational 
proficiency assessment (test score, license, or credential) for the technical education program 
area for which the certificate is sought. Information on the approved occupational proficiency 
assessments can be obtained from the Office of Career and Technical Education of the 
Department. 
4. Verification of current passing scores for the basic skills assessments of the 
AECAP. This requirement is effective if the Bachelor’s Equivalent Technical Education 2 
Certificate in a technical education program area is the applicant’s initial Degree Equivalent 
Certificate in a technical education program area. This requirement does not apply to an 
applicant holding a valid Specialty Area Certificate, a valid Degree Equivalent Certificate, a 
valid Professional Educator Certificate, or a valid Professional Leadership Certificate. 
5. Verification of successful completion of the Career and Technical Education 
Teacher Certification Program (CTE TCP) by submission of one of the following: 
(i) Department-approved professional development training history. 
(ii) Certificate of completion. 
(c)   Evaluation. Evaluation and approval by the Office of Career and Technical 
Education of the Department is required prior to issuance of the certificate. 
183 
===PAGE 86===
      
  
  
     
    
---
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION  
290-3-2-.18(4) 290-3-2-.18(4)(b)4. 
(4) Master’s Equivalent Technical Education 3 Certificate. 
(a) Application. The applicant is required to submit to the Educator Certification 
Section the current application for this approach and documentation of having met all 
requirements as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.18 and on the application. 
(b) Requirements. All requirements must be successfully completed prior to the 
date the application is received in the Educator Certification Section. 
1. Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
2. One of the following: 
(i) A valid, or eligibility to hold a valid, Bachelor’s Equivalent Technical Education 
2 Certificate in technical education and/or in a technical education program area for which the 
Master’s Equivalent Technical Education 3 Certificate is sought.  
(ii) A valid Type II or III Career and Technical Certificate in technical education 
and/or in a technical education program area for which the Master’s Eq uivalent Technical 
Education 3 Certificate is sought.  
3. Verification of a passing score on the Department-approved occupational 
proficiency assessment (test score, license, or credential) for the technical education program 
area for which the certificate is sought. Information on the approved occupational proficiency 
assessments can be obtained from the Office of Career and Technical Education of the 
Department. 
4. Verification of current passing scores for the basic skills assessments of the 
AECAP. This requirement is effective if the Master’s Equivalent Technical Education 3 
Certificate in a technical education program area is the applicant’s initial Degree Equivalent 
Certificate in a technical education program area. This requirement does not apply to an 
applicant holding a valid Specialty Area Certificate, a valid Degree Equivalent Certificate, a 
valid Professional Educator Certificate, or a valid Professional Leadership Certificate. 
184 
===PAGE 87===
  
     
      
         
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION  
290-3-2-.18(4)(b)5. 290-3-2-.18(4)(b)5.(ii)(I) 
5. Completion of one of the following six options: 
(i) Option 1. If the Career and Technical Education Teacher Certification Program 
(CTE TCP) was completed and used to meet requirements for the Bachelor’s Equivalent 
Technical Education 2 Certificate in technical education and/or a technical education program 
area, verification on official transcript(s) of at least 45 semester hours of earned credit, with 
grades of “C” or above, is required. The 45 semester hours include required courses and 
elective courses: 
(I) Required courses.  
Required Courses Number of Courses 
Classroom Management a 1 
Methods of Teaching Technical Education b 1 
Strategies for Teaching Special Needs Students in Inclusive Settings a 1 
English (not remedial level) 2 
Speech 1 
History 1 
Computer Applications 1 
Mathematics (not remedial level) 1 
Physical or Biological Science 1 
Economics 1 
aThese courses must be completed at an Alabama institution with a State-approved program. 
bThis course must be completed at an Alabama institution with a State-approved program in technical education. 
(II) Elective courses. Additional courses to complete the total 45 semester hours. 
Electives must be completed at an Alabama institution with a State-approved program in 
technical education.  
(ii) Option 2. If the CTE TCP was completed and used to meet requirements for the 
Bachelor’s Equivalent Technical Education 2 Certificate in technical education and/or a technical 
education program area, verification on official transcript(s) of at least 45 semester hours of 
earned credit, with grades of “C” or above, is required. The 45 semester hours include required 
courses and elective courses. The following 45 semester hours must be completed prior to 
July 1, 2017, and the application must be received in the Educator Certification Section prior 
to July 1, 2017: 
(I) Required courses. 
Required Courses Number of Courses 
Principles of Career and Technical Educationa 1 
Safetya 1 
Career and Technical Student Organizationsa 1 
English (not remedial level) 2 
Speech 1 
History 1 
Computer Applications 1 
Mathematics (not remedial level) 1 
Physical Science 1 
Economics 1 
aThese courses must be completed at an Alabama institution with a State-approved program in a career and 
technical education teaching field. 
185 
===PAGE 88===
 
 
 
 
 
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION  
290-3-2-.18(4)(b)5.(ii)(II) 290-3-2-.18(4)(b)5.(iv)(II) 
(II) Elective courses. Additional courses to compete the total 45 semester hours. 
Electives must be completed at an Alabama institution with a State-approved program in 
technical education. 
(iii) Option 3. If the CTE TCP was not used to meet requirements for the Bachelor’s 
Equivalent Technical Education 2 Certificate in technical education and/or a technical education 
program area, verification on official transcript(s) of at least 45 semester hours of earned credit, 
with grades of “C” or above, is required.  The 45 semester hours include required courses and 
elective courses. The following 45 semester hours must be completed prior to July 1, 2025, 
and the application must be received in the Educator Certification Section prior to July 1, 2025: 
(I)  Required courses.  
Required Courses Number of Courses 
Principles of Career and Technical Educationa 1 
Safetya 1 
Career and Technical Student Organizationsa 1 
English (not remedial level) 2 
Speech 1 
History 1 
Computer Applications 1 
Mathematics (not remedial level) 1 
Physical Science 1 
Economics 1 
aThese courses must be completed at an Alabama institution with a State-approved program in a career and 
technical education teaching field. 
(II) Elective courses. Additional courses to complete the total 45 semester hours. 
Electives must be completed at an Alabama institution with a State-approved program in 
technical education. 
(iv) Option 4. 
(I) Verification on an official transcript(s) of at least an earned bachelor’s degree 
from a regionally accredited senior institution.  
(II) If the CTE TCP was completed and used to meet requirements for the Bachelor’s 
Equivalent Technical Education 2 Certificate in technical education and/or a technical education 
program area, verification on an official transcript(s) of earned credit, with grades of “C” or 
above, for the following three courses is required: 
Required Courses Number of Courses 
Classroom Management a 1 
Methods of Teaching Technical Education b 1 
Strategies for Teaching Special Needs Students in Inclusive Settings a 1 
aThese courses must be completed at an Alabama institution with a State-approved program. 
bThis course must be completed at an Alabama institution with a State-approved program in technical education. 
186 
===PAGE 89===
  
 
      
 
  
       
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION  
290-3-2-.18(4)(b)5.(v) 290-3-2-.18(4)(c) 
(v) Option 5. 
(I) Verification on an official transcript(s) of at least an earned bachelor’s degree 
from a regionally accredited senior institution. 
(II) If the CTE TCP was completed and used to meet requirements for the Bachelor’s 
Equivalent Technical Education 2 Certificate in technical education and/or a technical education 
program area, verification on an official transcript(s) of earned credit for three courses, with 
grades of “C” or above, is required. The following three courses must be completed prior to 
July 1, 2017, and the application must be received in the Educator Certification Section prior 
to July 1, 2017:  
Required Courses Number of Courses 
Principles of Career and Technical Educationa 1 
Safetya 1 
Career and Technical Student Organizationsa 1 
aThese courses must be completed at an Alabama institution with a State-approved program in a career and 
technical education teaching field. 
(vi) Option 6. 
(I) Verification on an official transcript(s) of at least an earned bachelor’s degree 
from a regionally accredited senior institution. 
(II) If the CTE TCP was not used to meet requirements for the Bachelor’s Equivalent 
Technical Education 2 Certificate in technical education and/or a technical education program 
area, verification on an official transcript(s) of earned credit for three courses, with grades of 
“C” or above, is required. The following three courses must be completed prior to 
July 1, 2025, and the application must be received in the Educator Certification Section prior 
to July 1, 2025:  
Required Courses Number of Courses 
Principles of Career and Technical Educationa 1 
Safetya 1 
Career and Technical Student Organizationsa 1 
aThese courses must be completed at an Alabama institution with a State-approved program in a career and 
technical education teaching field. 
(c)  Evaluation. Evaluation and approval by the Office of Career and Technical 
Education of the Department is required prior to issuance of the certificate. 
187 
===PAGE 90===
      
     
      
      
   
  
      
SUPP. NO. 16-1            EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION  
290-3-2-.18(5) 290-3-2-.18(5)(c) 
(5) Master’s Equivalent Technical Education 4 Certificate. 
(a) Application. The applicant is required to submit to the Educator Certification 
Section the current application for this approach and documentation of having met all 
requirements as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.18 and on the application. 
(b) Requirements. All requirements must be successfully completed prior to the 
date the application is received in the Educator Certification Section. 
1. Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
2. A valid, or eligibility to hold a valid, Bachelor’s Equivalent Technical Education 3 
Certificate in technical education and/or in a technical education program area for which the 
Master’s Equivalent Technical Education 4 Certificate is sought. 
3. Verification of a passing score on the Department-approved occupational 
proficiency assessment (test score, license, or credential) for the technical education program 
area for which the certificate is sought. Information on the approved occupational proficiency 
assessments can be obtained from the Office of Career and Technical Education of the 
Department. 
4. Verification of current passing scores for the basic skills assessments of the AECAP.  
This requirement is effective if the Master’s Equivalent Technical Education 4 Certificate in a 
technical education program area is the applicant’s initial Degree Equivalent Certificate in a 
technical education program area. This requirement does not apply to an applicant holding a 
valid Specialty Area Certificate, a valid Degree Equivalent Certificate, a valid Professional 
Educator Certificate, or a valid Professional Leadership Certificate. 
5. Completion of one of the following options: 
(i) Option 1. Verification of at least a valid Alabama Class B Professional Educator 
Certificate in a teaching field. 
(ii) Option 2. Verification on an official transcript(s) of at least an earned bachelor’s 
degree from a regionally accredited senior institution with an academic major in the technical 
education program area for which the Master’s Equivalent Technical Education 4 Certificate is 
sought. The Office of Career and Technical Education of the Department will approve the 
academic major. 
(c)   Evaluation. Evaluation and approval by the Office of Career and Technical 
Education of the Department of is required prior to issuance of the certificate. 
188 
===PAGE 91===
 
    
       
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION  
290-3-2-.18(6) 290-3-2-.18(7) 
(6) Sixth-Year Equivalent Technical Education 5 Certificate. 
(a) Application. The applicant is required to submit to the Educator Certification 
Section the current application for this approach and documentation of having met all 
requirements as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.18 and on the application. 
(b) Requirements. All requirements must be successfully completed prior to the 
date the application is received in the Educator Certification Section. 
1. Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
2. A valid, or eligibility to hold a valid, Master’s Equivalent Technical Education 4 
Certificate in technical education and/or in a technical education program area for which the 
Sixth-Year Equivalent Technical Education 5 Certificate is sought. 
3. Verification of a passing score on the Department-approved occupational 
proficiency assessment (test score, license, or credential) for the technical education program 
area for which the certificate is sought. Information on the approved occupational proficiency 
assessments can be obtained from the Office of Career and Technical Education of the 
Department. 
4. Verification of current passing scores for the basic skills assessments of the 
AECAP. This requirement is effective if the Sixth-Year Equivalent Technical Education 5 
Certificate in a technical education program area is the applicant’s initial Degree Equivalent 
Certificate in a technical education program area. This requirement does not apply to an 
applicant holding a valid Specialty Area Certificate, a valid Degree Equivalent Certificate, a 
valid Professional Educator Certificate, or a valid Professional Leadership Certificate. 
5. Completion of one of the following options: 
(i) Option 1. Verification of at least a valid Alabama Class A Professional Educator 
Certificate in a teaching field or area of instructional support or a valid Alabama Class A 
Professional Leadership Certificate
. 
(ii) Option 2. Verification on an official transcript(s) of at least an earned master’s 
degree from a regionally accredited senior institution with an academic major in the technical 
education program area for which the Sixth-Year Equivalent Technical Education 5 Certificate is 
sought. The Office of Career and Technical Education of the Department will approve the 
academic major. 
(c)   Evaluation. Evaluation and approval by the Office of Career and Technical 
Education of the Department of is required prior to issuance of the certificate. 
(7) Professional Educator Certification. Individuals holding at least a valid 
Master’s Degree Equivalent Technical Education 4 Certificate in a technical education program 
area may be eligible for a Professional Educator Certificate. Additional information may be 
found in Rule 290-3-2-.19. 
189 
===PAGE 92===
 
   
         
   
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION  
290-3-2-.18(8) 290-3-2-.18(9)(c) 
(8) Adding Other Technical Education Program Areas. An applicant who holds 
at least a valid Bachelor’s Equivalent Technical Education 2 Certificate in a technical education 
program area may add additional program areas by meeting all requirements in 
Rule 290-3-2-.18(2). If all requirements are met, the additional technical education program 
area(s) will be added to the highest valid Degree Equivalent Technical Education Certificate 
held by the applicant. 
(9) Acceptable Full-Time Work Experience. Acceptable full-time work experience 
must have been attained through one or more of the following: 
(a) Work experience in business and industry as an employee in a compensated 
position in the technical education program area to be taught. The work experience must be 
verified with submission of: 
1. Supplement CTV; and 
2. A notarized cover letter verifying the applicant’s prior work experience. The 
cover letter must be on the employer’s business/company stationery and must include at least 
a description of the nature of the business/company, a brief description of the scope and quality 
of the applicant’s work history, and the original signature of the employer or owner of the 
business/company. 
(b) Self-employment in business and industry in the technical education program 
area to be taught. The self-employment experience must be verified with submission of: 
1. Supplement CTV; and 
2. A notarized cover letter on company stationery, a copy of each business license 
held during the verification period, and notarized letters from three individuals and/or 
companies with which business or work transactions occurred during the verification period.  
(c) Teaching experience at the secondary and/or postsecondary level in the technical 
education program area to be taught. The teaching experience must be verified on Supplement 
EXP. 
190 
===PAGE 93===
    
      
   
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION  
290-3-2-.18(10) 290-3-2-.18(12)(a) 
(10) Type Career and Technical Certificates. 
(a)  Type II and III Career and Technical Certificates in technical education and/or in 
a technical education program area were converted to Bachelor’s Equivalent Technical 
Education 2 Certificates on May 1, 2016. 
(b) Type I Career and Technical Certificates in technical education were issued on 
the basis of the Rules in effect prior to July 1, 1997. Prior to January 1, 2008, at the request of 
the certificate holder, a valid Type I Career and Technical Certificate was converted to the 
appropriate Level 3, 4, or 5 Career and Technical Certificate as determined by the Office of 
Career and Technical Education of the Department. Type I Career and Technical Certificates 
in technical education cannot be renewed. An individual holding an expired Type I Career and 
Technical Certificate in technical education who is seeking a current Career and Technical 
Certificate in a technical education program area must meet requirements for the Bachelor’s 
Equivalent Technical Education 1 Certificate in a technical education program area as a 
prerequisite to subsequent Degree Equivalent Certificates in a technical education program 
area.  
(11) Level Career and Technical Certificates. 
(a) An applicant holding a valid Level 2, 3, 4, or 5 Career and Technical Certificate 
in technical education and/or a technical education program area with a valid period ending on 
or prior to June 30, 2015, could apply for conversion of the Level Certificate to the appropriate 
Specialty Area 2, 3, 4, or 5 Career and Technical Certificate in technical education and/or a 
technical education program area. 
(b) Expired Level 2, 3, 4, and 5 Career and Technical Certificates in technical 
education and/or a technical education program area may be reinstated as the appropriate 
Degree Equivalent Technical Education Certificate as approved by the Office of Career and 
Technical Education of the Department.  Renewal requirements are prescribed in Rule 290-3-
2-.29. 
(c) The Level 1 Career and Technical Certificate in technical education was a 
nonrenewable certificate and cannot be continued or reinstated. An applicant holding an 
expired Level 1 Career and Technical Certificate in technical education who is seeking a 
current Career and Technical Certificate in a technical education program area must meet 
requirements for the Bachelor’s Equivalent Technical Education Certificate 1 in a technical 
education program area as a prerequisite to subsequent Degree Equivalent Technical Education 
Certificates in a technical education program area. 
(12) Specialty Area Career and Technical Certificates. 
(a) Specialty Area l, 2, 3, 4, and 5 Career and Technical Certificates in technical 
education and/or a technical education program area were converted to the appropriate Degree 
Equivalent Certificate on May 1, 2016. 
191 
===PAGE 94===
   
   
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
         
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION  
290-3-2-.18(12)(b)       290-3-2-.18 History 
(b) Expired Specialty Area 2, 3, 4, and 5 Career and Technical Certificates in 
technical education and/or a technical education program area may be reinstated as the 
appropriate Degree Equivalent Technical Education Certificate as approved by the Office of 
Career and Technical Education of the Department. Renewal requirements are prescribed in 
Rule 290-3-2-.29. 
(13) Name of Certificate, Degree Equivalency, Valid Period, and Renewability. 
Name of Certificate Degree Equivalency Valid Period Renewable 
Bachelor’s Equivalent 1 Bachelor’s Minimum of 2 years a No 
Bachelor’s Equivalent 2 Bachelor’s Minimum of 5 years c Yes 
Master’s Equivalent 3 Master’s cMinimum of 5 years Yes 
Master’s Equivalent 4 Master’s Minimum of 5 years c Yes 
Sixth-Year Equivalent 5 Sixth-Year Minimum of 5 years c Yes 
Specialty Area 1 Bachelor's Minimum of 2 years a No 
Specialty Area 2 Bachelor's Minimum of 5 years b,c Yes 
Specialty Area 3 Master's Minimum of 5 years c Yes 
Specialty Area 4 Master's Minimum of 5 years c Yes 
Specialty Area 5 Sixth-year Minimum of 5 years c Yes 
Level 1 Bachelor’s 3 years No 
Level 2 d Bachelor’s 5 years Yes 
Level 3 d Master’s 5 years Yes 
Level 4 d Master’s 5 years Yes 
Level 5 d Sixth-year 5 years Yes 
Type I e Master’s 10 years No 
Type II c, f Bachelor's Minimum of 5 years Yes 
Type III c, f Bachelor's Minimum of 5 years Yes 
aBachelor’s Equivalent 1 and Specialty Area 1 Certificates are/were valid from the date of issuance through the 
remainder of the same scholastic year, and thereafter, for the next two consecutive scholastic years. 
bSpecialty Area 2 Certificates issued prior to August 1, 2012, were valid for five years and nonrenewable. 
Effective August 1, 2012, the Specialty Area 2 Certificate could be continued or reinstated. 
cThese Career and Technical Certificates are valid from the date of issuance through the remainder of the same 
scholastic year, and thereafter, for the next five consecutive scholastic years. 
dThe Level Certificates were initially issued on the basis of Rules in effect prior to September 2008. These 
certificates were converted to the appropriate Specialty Area Certificate. Expired Level 2, 3, 4, or 5 Certificates 
may be reinstated as the appropriate Degree Equivalent Certificate. 
eType I Certificates were initially issued on the basis of Rules in effect prior to July 1, 1997. These certificates 
were converted to the appropriate Level Certificate. As prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.18(10)(e), expired Type I 
Certificates cannot be reinstated. 
fType II and III Certificates were initially issued on the basis of Rules in effect prior to July 1, 1997. These 
certificates may be continued or reinstated as a Bachelor’s Equivalent Technical Education 2 Certificate. 
Author: Dr. Thomas R. Bice 
Statutory Authority: Ala. Const. Amend. 284, Ala. Code §§16-3-11, 16-23-1 and 16-23-2 (1975). 
History: Adopted new, 8-4-08, effective 9-18 -08; repealed and adopted new 12-9-10, effective 1- 14-11; repealed and 
adopted new 6-14-12, effective 7-19-12; emergency Rule to amend filed 1-10-13; amended Rule adopted 3-14 -13, effective 
4-18-13; emergency Rule to amend filed 6-13-13; amended Rule adopted 8-8-13; effective 9-12-13; emergency Rule to repeal 
filed 11-14-13; repealed and adopted new 1-17-14, effective 2-21-14; repealed and adopted new 3-10-16, effective 4-24-16. 
192 
===PAGE 95===
  
      
 
  
 
 
      
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.19 290-3-2-.19(4)(e)1. 
290-3-2-.19 Career and Technical Certificate to a Professional Educator Certificate. 
(1) Overview. An individual holding a valid Master’s Equivalent Technical 
Education 4 Certificate or Sixth-Year Equivalent Technical Education 5 Certificate in a 
technical education program area or a valid Master’s Equivalent Health Science 3 Certificate or 
Sixth-Year Equivalent Health Science 4 Certificate may meet requirements for a Class B 
Secondary Professional Educator Certificate in the same technical education program area or in 
health science. Evaluation and approval by the Office of Career and Technical Education of 
the Department is required prior to issuance of the certificate. 
(2) Limitations on Issuance. This approach is available only in health science and 
the technical education program areas listed on the valid Master’s Equivalent Tech nical 
Education 4 Certificate or Sixth-Year Equivalent Technical Education 5 Certificate. 
(3) Application. The applicant is required to submit to the Educator Certification 
Section the current application for this approach and documentation of having met all 
requirements as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.19 and on the application. 
(4) Requirements for Health Science. All requirements must be successfully 
completed prior to the date the application is received in the Educator Certification Section. 
(a) Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
(b) A valid Master’s Equivalent Health Science 3 Certificate or Sixth -Year 
Equivalent Health Science 4 Certificate. 
(c) Verification of an active Alabama license in registered nursing, paramedical, or 
an approved allied health specialty. 
(d) Verification of current passing scores for the basic skills assessments of the 
Alabama Educator Certification Assessment Program (AECAP) on a test administration date 
prior to the date the application is received in the Educator Certification Section. This 
requirement does not apply to an applicant holding a valid Professional Educator Certificate or 
a valid Professional Leadership Certificate.  
(e) Verification on an official transcript(s) of an earned bachelor’s or higher degree 
with an academic major in a healthcare or related area from a regionally accredited senior 
institution. The Office of Career and Technical Education of the Department must approve the 
healthcare or related area. 
1. For applications received in the Section prior to July 1, 2017, the bachelor’s 
degree must be posted with a minimum overall grade point average (GPA) of at least 2.5 or the 
master’s or higher degree must be posted with a minimum overall GPA of at least 3.0. The 
overall GPA is the GPA posted on the official transcript of the degree-granting institution that 
was used as the basis for granting the degree.  
193 
===PAGE 96===
   
           
 
 
    
    
SUPP. NO. 16-1   EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.19(4)(e)2. 290-3-2-.19(5)(e)1. 
2. For applications received in the Section on July 1, 2017, and thereafter, the 
bachelor’s degree must be posted with a minimum overall GPA of at least 2.75 or the 
master’s or higher degree must be posted with a minimum overall GPA of at least 3.0. 
The overall GPA is the GPA posted on the official transcript of the degree granting institution 
that was 
3. The GPA requirement does not apply to an applicant holding a valid Professional 
Educator Certificate or Professional Leadership Certificate. 
(f) Verification on an official transcript of earned credit for strategies for teaching 
special needs students in inclusive settings at an Alabama institution with State-approved 
programs. A grade of “C” or above must have been earned in the course.  
(g) Verification of two full scholastic years of full-time classroom teaching 
experience in grades 6-12 health science. Partial years cannot be combined to meet this 
requirement.  Experience must be verified on Supplement EXP. 
(h) Verification of a current passing score for the prescribed Praxis II Principles of 
Learning and Teaching Test of the Alabama Educator Certification Assessment Program 
(AECAP). This requirement does not apply to an applicant holding a valid Professional 
Educator Certificate or a valid Professional Leadership Certificate. 
(5) Requirements for Technical Education Program Areas. All requirements 
must be successfully completed prior to the date the application is received in the Educator 
Certification Section. 
(a) Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
(b) A valid Master’s Equivalent Technical Education 4 Certificate or Sixth -Year 
Equivalent Technical Education 5 Certificate in a technical education program area for which 
the Professional Educator Certificate is sought. 
(c) Verification of a passing score on the Department-approved occupational 
proficiency assessment (test score, license, or credential) for the technical education program 
area for which the certificate is sought. Information on the approved occupational proficiency 
assessments can be obtained from the Offic e of Career and Technical Education of the 
Department. 
(d) Verification of current passing scores for the basic skills assessments of the 
Alabama Educator Certification Assessment Program (AECAP) on a test administration date 
prior to the date the application is received in the Educator Certification Section. This 
requirement does not apply to an applicant holding a valid Professional Educator Certificate or 
a valid Professional Leadership Certificate.  
(e) Verification on an official transcript(s) of an earned bachelor’s or higher degree 
with an academic major in the technical education program area for which the certificate is 
sought from a regionally accredited senior institution. The Office of Career and Technical 
Education of the Department must approve the academic major. 
1. For applications received in the Section prior to July 1, 2017, the bachelor’s 
degree must be posted with a minimum overall grade point average (GPA) of at least 2.5 or the 
master’s or higher degree must be posted with a minimum overall GPA of at least 3.0. The 
overall GPA is the GPA posted on the official transcript of the degree-granting institution that 
was used as the basis for granting the degree.  
194 
===PAGE 97===
   
       
 
 
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.19(5)(e)2. 290-3-2-.19 History 
2. For applications received in the Section on July 1, 2017, and thereafter, the 
bachelor’s degree must be posted with a minimum overall GPA of at least 2.75 or the 
master’s or higher degree must be posted with a minimum overall GPA of at least 3.0. 
The overall GPA is the GPA posted on the official transcript of the degree granting institution 
that was used as the basis for granting the degree.  
3. The GPA requirement does not apply to an applicant holding a valid Professional 
Educator Certificate or Professional Leadership Certificate. 
(f) Verification on an official transcript of earned credit for strategies for teaching 
special needs students in inclusive settings at an Alabama institution with State-approved 
programs. A grade of “C” or above must have been earned in the course.  
(g) Verification of two full scholastic years of full-time classroom teaching 
experience in grades 6-12 in the technical education program area for which the certificate is 
sought. Partial years cannot be combined to meet this requirement. Experience must be verified 
on Supplement EXP. 
(h) Verification of a current passing score for the prescribed Praxis II Principles of 
Learning and Teaching Test of the Alabama Educator Certification Assessment Program 
(AECAP). This requirement does not apply to an applicant holding a valid Professional 
Educator Certificate or a valid Professional Leadership Certificate. 
(6) Alabama Educator Certification Assessment Program (AECAP). The 
applicant must meet the requirements of the AECAP for this approach. 
(7) Degree Level. The Professional Educator Certificate issued through this 
approach shall be issued only at the Class B (bachelor’s degree) level. 
(8) Valid Period. The valid period of the certificate shall be from the date of 
issuance through the remainder of the same scholastic year, and thereafter, for the next five 
consecutive scholastic years. 
Author: Dr. Thomas R. Bice 
Statutory Authority: Ala. Const. Amend. 284, Ala. Code §§16-3-11, 16-23-1 and 16-23-2 (1975). 
History: Adopted new 3-10-16, effective 4-24-16. 
195 
===PAGE 98===
    
    
  
 
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.20 290-3-2-.20(5)(c) 
290-3-2-.20 Certificates Issued by Another State(s), the District of Columbia, a U.S. 
Territory, or the Department of Defense Education Activity (DoDEA) 
Approach 
(1) Overview. An individual who holds a valid professional educator certificate 
issued by another state, the District of Columbia, a U.S. Territory, or the Department o f 
Defense Education Activity (henceforth in this Rule referred to as “another state”) may seek 
an Alabama Professional Educator Certificate or Professional Leadership Certificate. This 
approach is commonly referred to as Certificate Reciprocity. 
(2) Limitations on Issuance. 
(a) An individual may be eligible for Alabama certification only if the professional 
educator certificate issued by another state is in an area, at a grade level, and at degree level in 
which Alabama offers comparable certification.  
(b) Alabama does not offer certification based on “in -field” or “supplemental” or 
“endorsement” areas which are contingent upon the individual holding other professional 
educator certificates. 
(c) Speech-Language Pathology certification is not available through this 
approach.  
(d) The issuance of Professional Educator Certificates in areas of instructional 
support and Professional Leadership Certificates require verification of prior professional 
educational work experience in a P-12 setting. Additional information is in Rule 290-3-2-.03. 
(e) Certification will not be considered if Alabama no longer offers certification at 
the degree level of the professional educator certificate issued by another state. An individual 
may be eligible for Alabama certification in an area in which Alabama does not currently offer, 
but has previously offered, certification. 
(f) Alabama does not offer certification at the doctoral level. 
(3) Degree Requirements. Degrees applied to meet certification requirements 
must be from regionally accredited senior institutions, except as noted in Rule 290-3-2-.02(7). 
(a) For teaching fields, verification on an official transcript(s) of an earned 
bachelor’s or higher degree. 
(b) For areas of instructional support, verification on an official transcript(s) of an 
earned master’s or higher degree.  
(4) Application. The applicant is required to submit to the Educator Certification 
Section the current application for this approach and documentation of having met all 
requirements as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.20 and on the application. 
(5) Requirements for Teaching Fields. All requirements must be successfully 
completed prior to the date the application is received in the Educator Certification Section. 
(a) Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
(b) Verification on official transcript(s) of all degrees earned. 
(c) Successful completion of the degree requirements in Rule 290-3-2-.20(3). 
196 
===PAGE 99===
  
    
  
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.20(5)(d) 290-3-2-.20(6)(e)1. 
(d) Verification of the applicant’s valid professional educator certificate in a 
teaching field shall be based on submission of one of the following: 
1. The original professional educator certificate issued by another state. 
2. Supplement CER completed by the certificate issuing authority. 
(e) The completion of a graduate-level (master’s degree level or higher ) state-
approved P-12 educator preparation program may be verified on Form VER for consideration 
of advancing the degree level of the Alabama certificate offered to an applicant whose valid 
professional educator certificate issued by another state reflects an area of comparable 
certification, but does not reflect a degree level. 
1. The program must require at least 30 semester hours of graduate credit and the 
transcript must post a major in the teaching field at the degree level of the program. However, 
if by institutional policy a major in the teaching field is not posted, verification of having 
earned at least 12 semester hours of graduate credit in the teaching field is required. The 12 
semester hours of graduate credit may not include credit for internship, practicum, student 
teaching, or lab experiences. This credit must have been earned prior to the date of program 
completion and must not have been applied to the prior issuance of an Alabama certificate in 
any area. 
(6) Requirements for Instructional Support Areas other than Areas of 
Administration or Supervision. All requirements must be successfully completed prior to 
the date the application is received in the Educator Certification Section. 
(a) Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
(b) Verification on official transcript(s) of all degrees earned. 
(c) Successful completion of the degree requirements in Rule 290-3-2-.20(3). 
(d) Verification of the applicant’s valid graduate-level (master’s degree, sixth-year, 
education specialist, and/or doctoral level) professional educator certificate in an instructional 
support area other than administration or supervision shall be based on submission of one of 
the following: 
1. The original professional educator certificate issued by another state. 
2. Supplement CER completed by the certificate issuing authority. 
(e) The completion of a graduate-level (master’s degree level or hig her) 
state-approved P-12 educator preparation program may be verified on Form VER for 
consideration of advancing the degree level of the Alabama certificate offered to an applicant 
whose valid professional educator certificate issued by another state reflects an area of 
comparable certification, but does not reflect a degree level. 
1. The program must require at least 30 semester hours of graduate credit and the 
transcript must post a major in the area of instructional support at the degree level of the 
program. However, if by institutional policy a major in the area of instructional support is not 
posted, verification of having earned at least 12 semester hours of graduate credit in the area 
of instructional support is required. The 12 semester hours of graduate credit may not include 
credit for internship, practicum, student teaching, or lab experiences. This credit must have 
been earned prior to the date of program completion and must not have been applied to the 
prior issuance of an Alabama certificate in any area. 
197 
===PAGE 100===
    
   
--
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.20(6)(f) 290-3-2-.20(8)(c) 
(f) Verification of at least two full years of full-time, professional educational work 
experience in a P-12 school system(s). Professional educational work experience in increments 
of less than one semester will not apply toward the calculation of two full years. Experience 
must be verified on Supplement EXP. 
(7) Requirements for Areas of Educational Administration. All requirements 
must be successfully completed prior to the date the application is received in the Educator 
Certification Section. 
(a) Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
(b) Verification on official transcript(s) of all degrees earned. 
(c) Successful completion of the degree requirements in Rule 290-3-2-.20(3). 
(d) Verification of the applicant’s valid graduate-level (master’s degree, sixth-year, 
education specialist, and/or doctoral level) professional educator certificate in an area of 
educational administration shall be based on submission of one of the following: 
1. The original professional educator certificate issued by another state. 
2. Supplement CER completed by the certificate issuing authority. 
(e) The completion of a gradua te-level (master’s degree level or higher) state-
approved P-12 educator preparation program may be verified on Form VER for consideration 
of advancing the degree level of the Alabama certificate offered to an applicant whose valid 
professional educator certificate issued by another state reflects an area of comparable 
certification, but does not reflect a degree level. 
1. The program must require at least 30 semester hours of graduate credit and the 
transcript must post a major in the area of educational administration at the degree level of the 
program. However, if by institutional policy a major in the area of educational administration 
is not posted, verification of having earned at least 12 semester hours of graduate credit in the 
area of educational administration is required. The 12 semester hours of graduate credit may 
not include credit for internship, practicum, student teaching, or lab experiences. This credit 
must have been earned prior to the date of program completion and must not have been applied 
to the prior issuance of an Alabama certificate in any area. 
(f) Verification of at least three full years of full-time professional educational work 
experience in a P-12 school system(s) which must include at least one full year of full-time 
classroom teaching experience. Professional educational work experience in increments of 
less than one semester will not apply toward the calculation of three ful l years. Experience 
must be verified on Supplement EXP.  
(g) Certification in the area of Instructional Leadership will not be issued through 
this approach. 
(8) Requirements for Areas of Supervision. All requirements must be 
successfully completed prior to the date the application is received in the Educator Certification 
Section. 
(a) Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
(b) Verification on official transcript(s) of all degrees earned. 
(c) Successful completion of the degree requirements in Rule 290-3-2-.20(3). 
198 
===PAGE 101===
   
   
--
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.20(8)(d) 290-3-2-.20 History 
(d) Verification of the applicant’s valid graduate-level (master’s degree, sixth-year, 
education specialist, and/or doctoral level) professional educator certificate in an area of 
supervision shall be based on submission of one of the following: 
1. The original professional educator certificate issued by another state. 
2. Supplement CER completed by the certificate issuing authority. 
(e) The completion of a graduate-lev el (master’s degree level or higher) state-
approved P-12 educator preparation program may be verified on Form VER for consideration 
of advancing the degree level of the Alabama certificate offered to an applicant whose valid 
professional educator certificate issued by another state reflects an area of comparable 
certification, but does not reflect a degree level. 
1. The program must require at least 30 semester hours of graduate credit and the 
transcript must post a major in the area of supervision at the degree level of the program. 
However, if by institutional policy a major in the area of supervision is not posted, verification 
of having earned at least 12 semester hours of graduate credit in the area of supervision is 
required. The 12 semester hours of graduate credit may not include credit for internship, 
practicum, student teaching, or lab experiences. This credit must have been earned prior to the 
date of program completion and must not have been applied to the prior issuance of an Alabama 
certificate in any area. 
(f) Verification of at least three full years of full-time professional educational 
work experience in a P-12 school system(s) which must include at least one full year of full-
time classroom teaching experience. Professional educational work experience in increments 
of less than one semester will not apply toward the calculation of three full years. Experience 
must be verified on Supplement EXP. 
(9) Alabama Educator Certification Assessment Program (AECAP). The 
applicant must meet the requirements of the AECAP for this approach. 
(10) Degree Level. The Professional Educator Certificate or Professional 
Leadership Certificate issued through this approach shall be issued at the degree level of the 
professional educator certificate issued by another state or at a degree level based on 
Supplement VER. 
(11) Valid Period.  The valid period of the certificate shall be from the date of 
issuance through the remainder of the same scholastic year, and thereafter, for the next five 
consecutive scholastic years.  
Author: Dr. Thomas R. Bice. 
Statutory Authority: Ala. Code §§16-3-11, 16-23-1 and 16-23-2 (1975). 
History: New 12-19 -78, repealed 12-8-94, effective 12-31-96; new adopted 12-8-94, effective 1-1-97, repealed 
11-14-96 and amended repealed date of original chapter to 6- 30-97 new adopted 1-9-97 effective 7-1-97; amended: 
6-14-99; effective 7-19-99; amended 9-1-99; effective 10-14-99; amended 01- 11-01, effective 02-15 -01, repealed and new 
adopted 06- 13-02; emergency Rule to appeal and adopt new filed on 6-13 -02; new adopted 8-8-02, effective 9-12-02; 
emergency Rule to appeal and adopt new filed on 10-10 -02; new adopted 12- 12-02, effective 1-16-03; repealed and new 
adopted 09- 11-03 effective 10- 16-03; amended 06- 10-04 effective 07- 15-04; emergency amended Rule adopted 4- 14-05, 
effective 4-14-05; amended Rule adopted 6-9-05, effective 7-14-05; repealed and adopted new, 8-4-08, effective 9-18-08; 
amended 4-8-10, effective 5-13-10; repealed and adopted new 12-9-10, effective 1-14-11; repealed and adopted new 3-10-16, 
effective 4-24-16. 
199 
===PAGE 102===
SUPP. NO. 16-1   EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.21 290-3-2-.21 History 
290-3-2-.21 Child Nutrition Program Director Certificate Approach. 
(1) Requirements. 
(a) Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
(b) A recommendation from the Child Nutrition Program of the Department to the 
Educator Certification Section. 
(2) Valid Period. The valid period of the certificate shall be from the date of 
issuance through the remainder of the same scholastic year, and thereafter, for the next five 
consecutive scholastic years. The certificate may be renewed upon application to the Child 
Nutrition Program of the Department. Renewal requirements in effect at the time of application 
must be met. 
Author: Dr. Thomas R. Bice 
Statutory Authority: Ala. Const. Amend. 284, Ala. Code §§16-3-11, 16-23-1 and 16-23-2 (1975). 
History: Adopted new, 8-4-08, effective 9-18-08; repealed and adopted new 12-9-10, effective 1-14-1; emergency Rule to 
repeal filed 11-14 -13; repealed and adopted new 1-17-14, effective 2-21-14; repealed and adopted new 3-10-16, effective 
4-24-16. 
200 
===PAGE 103===
     
       
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.22 290-3-2-.22 History 
290-3-2-.22 Council for Accreditation of Counseling and Related Education Programs 
(CACREP) Approach. 
(1) Overview. An individual who has completed at least a master’s degree level 
CACREP-accredited school counseling program may seek a Class A School Counselor 
Professional Educator Certificate. 
(2) Application. The applicant is required to submit to the Educator Certification 
Section the current application for this approach and documentation of having met all 
requirements as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.22 and on the application. 
(3) Requirements. All requirements must be successfully completed prior to the 
date the application is received in the Educator Certification Section. 
(a) Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
(b) Verification on official transcript(s) of all degrees earned. 
(c) Verification on an official transcript(s) of an earned master’s or higher degree 
from a regionally accredited senior institution. 
(d) Verification, on the current application for this approach, of completion of a 
master’s degree level CACREP-accredited school counseling program. 
(e) Verification, on the current application for this approach, that the senior 
institution was regionally accredited at the time of program completion.  
(f) Verification of a passing score on the National Counseling Examination for 
Licensure and Certification (NCE). 
(4) Alabama Educator Certification Assessment Program (AECAP). The 
applicant must meet the requirements of the AECAP for this approach.  
(5) Degree Level. The Professional Educator Certificate obtained through this 
approach shall be issued at the Class A level. 
(6) Valid Period. The valid period of the certificate shall be from the date of 
issuance through the remainder of the same scholastic year, and thereafter, for the next five 
consecutive scholastic years.  
Author: Dr. Thomas R. Bice 
Statutory Authority: Ala. Const. Amend. 284, Ala. Code §§16-3-11, 16-23-1 and 16-23-2 (1975). 
History: Adopted new, 8-4-08, effective 9-18 -08; repealed and adopted new 12-9-10, effective 1- 14-11; repealed and 
adopted new 3-10-16, effective 4-10-16. 
201 
===PAGE 104===
 
        
  
SUPP. NO. 16-1                  EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.23 290-3-2-.23 History 
290-3-2-.23 Additional Certification in Driver and Traffic Safety Education Approach. 
(1) Overview. An individual may seek additional certification in Driver and Traffic 
Safety Education. 
(2) Limitations on Issuance. This approach is not available to an individual who 
holds only a Provisional Certificate, Interim Employment Certificate, Business and Industry to 
Educational Administrator Certificate, Career and Technical (Level, Type, Specialty Area, 
Degree Equivalent, and/or Temporary) Certificate, Speech-Language Pathology Assistant 
Certificate, Speech-Language Pathology Temporary Certificate, Child Nutrition Program 
Director Certificate, Junior Reserve Officer Training Corps (JROTC) Certificate, Emergency 
Certificate, or Substitute License. 
(3) Application. The applicant is required to submit to the Educator Certification 
Section the current application for this approach and documentation of having met all 
requirements as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.23 and on the application. 
(4) Requirements. All requirements must be successfully completed prior to the date 
the application is received in the Educator Certification Section. 
(a) Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
(b) A valid Professional Educator Certificate or Professional Leadership Certificate 
as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.03. 
(c) Verification of earned credit for both the basic and advanced driver’s education 
coursework provided by the Department in cooperation with one or more Alabama senior 
institutions with State-approved programs. A grade of “C” or above must have been earned in 
each course.  The earned credit must be documented on an official transcript(s). 
(5) Degree Level. The Secondary Professional Educator Certificate issued through 
this approach shall be issued only at the Class B (bachelor’s degree) level. 
(6) Valid Period. The valid period of the certificate shall be from the date of 
issuance through the remainder of the same scholastic year, and thereafter, for the next five 
consecutive scholastic years.  
Author: Dr. Thomas R. Bice 
Statutory Authority: Ala. Const. Amend. 284, Ala. Code §§16-3-11, 16-23-1 and 16-23-2 (1975). 
History: Emergency Rule to adopt new filed 11-14 -13; adopted new 1-17-14, effective 2-21-14; repealed and adopted new  
3-10-16, effective 4-24-16. 
202 
===PAGE 105===
     
 
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.24 290-3-2-.24(4)(c) 
290-3-2-.24 Emergency Certificate. 
(1) Overview. In cases of emergency when an individual who holds a valid 
Alabama certificate is not available, a superintendent or administrator who wishes to employ 
an individual may request an Emergency Certificate. The Emergency Certificate is not an 
alternative certificate. An individual holding an Emergency Certificate cannot be deemed 
highly qualified. 
(2) Limitations on Issuance. 
(a) An individual who holds a valid Alabama certificate is not eligible to receive 
an Emergency Certificate. 
(b) An Emergency Certificate is issued only for a single teaching field or area of 
instructional support. 
(c) An Emergency Certificate will not be issued for driver and traffic safety 
education, school psychometry, or school psychology. 
(d) An individual who has held one Emergency Certificate is not eligible to receive 
another Emergency Certificate in any teaching field or area of instructional support. 
(e) Effective beginning with the 2016-2017 scholastic year , an individual who 
holds or previously held a Career and Technical Education Temporary Certificate in health 
science or a technical education program area is not eligible to receive an Emergency 
Certificate in the same area. 
(3) Application.  
(a) The applicant is required to submit to the employing superintendent or 
administrator the current application for this approach and documentation of having met all 
requirements as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.24 and on the application. 
(b) The superintendent or administrator who wishes to employ the applicant is 
required to submit to the Educator Certification Section: 
1. A recommendation requesting issuance of the Emergency Certificate. 
2. The applicant’s current application and documentation of having met all 
requirements. 
(4) Requirements. All requirements must be successfully completed prior to the 
date the application is received in the Educator Certification Section. 
(a) Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
(b) Verification on an official transcript(s) of an earned bachelor’s or higher degree 
from a senior institution that was regionally accredited at the time the degree was conferred. 
(c) An Emergency Certificate in the technical education program area of 
cosmetology requires verification of a valid Alabama Cosmetology Instructor License. 
203 
===PAGE 106===
     
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.24(4)(d) 290-3-2-.24 History 
(d) An Emergency Certificate in health science requires verification of an active 
Alabama license in a registered nursing, paramedical, or an approved allied health specialty. 
(5) Degree Level. The Emergency Certificate shall be issued at the bachelor’s 
degree level. 
(6) Valid Period.  The valid period of the Emergency Certificate shall be no more 
than one scholastic year (July 1 to June 30). The Emergency Certificate shall be valid from 
the date the certificate is issued through June 30 of the scholastic year for which it is issued.  
The Emergency Certificate will not be continued, renewed, reinstated, or reissued.   
Author: Dr. Thomas R. Bice. 
Statutory Authority: Ala. Const. Amend. 284, Ala. Code §§16-3-11, 16-23-1 and 16-23-2 (1975). 
History: Adopted new, 8-4-08, effective 9-18-08; repealed and adopted; emergency Rule to repeal filed 11-14 -13; repealed 
and adopted new 1-17-14, effective 2-21-14; repealed and adopted new 3-10-16, effective 4-24-16. 
204 
===PAGE 107===
  
     
  
 
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.25 290-3-2-.25(5)(c)2.(i) 
290-3-2-.25   Foreign Credentials Approach. 
(1) Overview. An individual who earned a bachelor’s or higher degree and 
completed an educator preparation program at a university or college in another country may 
seek a Professional Educator Certificate in a teaching field. 
(2) Limitations on Issuance. 
(a) An individual may be eligible for Alabama certification if the individual’s 
major program area or specific teaching field completed in another country is in a teaching 
field, at a grade level, and at a degree level in which Alabama offers comparable certification.    
(b) Alabama certification in areas of instructional support are not available based 
on a program completed in another country. 
(c) Certification will not be considered if Alabama no longer offers certification at 
the degree level of the program completed in another country. An individual may be eligible 
for Alabama certification in a teaching field in which Alabama does not currently offer, but 
has previously offered, certification. 
(d) Alabama does not offer certification at the doctoral level. 
(3) Degree Requirements. 
(a) Degrees applied to meet certification requirements must be from a university or 
college that is equivalent to a regionally accredited senior institution in the United States.  
(b) The individual must have earned a degree that is equivalent to at least an earned 
bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited senior institution in the United States.  
(4) Application. The applicant is required to submit to the Educator Certification 
Section the current application for this approach and documentation of having met all 
requirements as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.25 and on the application. 
(5) Requirements. All requirements must be successfully completed prior to the 
date the application is received in the Educator Certification Section. 
(a) Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
(b) Successful completion of the degree requirements in Rule 290-3-2-.25(3). 
(c) Evaluation of the applicant’s foreign credentials. 
1. The evaluation must be from a Department-approved foreign credential 
evaluation agency. A list of approved agencies may be found on the current application for this 
approach. 
2. The original complete evaluation must be submitted and must include all of the 
following: 
(i) An accurate course-by-course and credit hour-by-credit hour translation of the 
coursework completed. 
205 
===PAGE 108===
  
    
  
     
       
  
    
 
      
      
 
     
       
   
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.25(5)(c)2.(ii) 290-3-2-.25(7)(c) 
(ii) A statement that the applicant has earned at least a  bachelor’s degree which is 
equivalent to a bachelor’s degree granted by a regionally accredited senior institution in the 
United States. 
(iii) A statement that the applicant has completed an educator preparation program 
that is equivalent to at least a bachelor’s degree level state-approved program in the United 
States. The statement must include the major program area or specific teaching field. 
(iv) If applicable, a statement that the applicant has earned a master’s degree which 
is equivalent to a master’s degree granted by a regionally accredited senior institution in the 
United States. 
(v) If applicable, a statement that the applicant has completed an educator 
preparation program that is equivalent to a master’s degree level state-approved program in the 
United States.  The statement must include the major program area or specific teaching field. 
(vi) If applicable, a statement that the applicant has completed a sixth-year program, 
earned an education specialist degree, or earned a doctoral degree which is equivalent to a 
sixth-year program, an education specialist degree, or a doctoral degree granted by a regionally 
accredited senior institution in the United States.  
(vii) If applicable, a statement that the applicant has completed an educator 
preparation program that is equivalent to a sixth-year, an education specialist, or a doctoral 
degree level state-approved program in the United States. The statement must include the 
major program area or specific teaching field.  
(6) Alabama Educator Certification Assessment Program (AECAP). The 
applicant must meet the requirements of the AECAP for this approach. 
(7) Degree Level. The Professional Educator Certificate in a teaching field issued 
through this approach shall be issued at the Class B (bachelor’s), Class A (master’s), or Class 
AA (sixth-year/education specialist but not doctoral) level based upon statements in the 
applicant’s foreign credentials evaluation from a Department-approved evaluation agency as 
follows: 
(a) Class B level. The applicant must have earned at least a bachelor’s degree 
which is equivalent to a bachelor’s degree granted by a regionally accredited senior institution 
in the United States and completed an educator preparation program equivalent to at least a 
bachelor’s degree level state-approved program in the United States in the area of the certificate 
to be issued. 
(b) Class A. The applicant must have earned a master’s degree which is equivalent 
to a master’s degree granted by a regionally accredited senior institution in the United States 
and completed an educator preparation p rogram equivalent to a master’s degree level 
state-approved program in the United States in the area of the certificate to be issued. 
(c) Class AA. The applicant must have completed a sixth-year program, earned an 
education specialist degree, or earned a doctoral degree which is equivalent to a sixth-year 
program, an education specialist, or doctoral degree granted by a regionally accredited senior 
institution in the United States and completed an educator preparation program equivalent to a 
sixth-year, an education specialist, or doctoral degree level state-approved program in the 
United States in the area of the certificate to be issued. 
206 
===PAGE 109===
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.25(8) 290-3-2-.25 History 
(8) Valid Period. The valid period of the certificate shall be from the date of 
issuance through the remainder of the same scholastic year, and thereafter, for the next five 
consecutive scholastic years. 
Author: Dr. Thomas R. Bice. 
Statutory Authority: Ala. Code §§16-3-11, 16-23-1 and 16-23-2 (1975). 
History: New 12-19 -78, repealed 12-8-94, effective 12-31-96; new adopted 12-8-94, effective 1-1-97, repealed 
11-14-96 and amended repealed date of original chapter to 6- 30-97 new adopted 1-9-97 effective 7-1-97; amended: 
6-14-99; effective 7-19-99; amended 9-1-99; effective 10-14-99; amended 01- 11-01, effective 02-15 -01, repealed and new 
adopted 06- 13-02; emergency Rule to appeal and adopt new filed on 6-13 -02; new adopted 8-8-02, effective 9-12-02; 
emergency Rule to appeal and adopt new filed on 10-10 -02; new adopted 12- 12-02, effective 1-16-03; repealed and new 
adopted 09- 11-03 effective 10- 16-03; amended 06- 10-04 effective 07- 15-04; emergency amended Rule adopted 4- 14-05, 
effective 4-14-05; amended Rule adopted 6-9-05, effective 7-14-05; repealed and adopted new, 8-4-08, effective 9-18-08; 
amended 4-8-10, effective 5-13-10; repealed and adopted new 12-9-10, effective 1-14-11; repealed and adopted new 3-10-16, 
effective 4-24-16. 
207 
===PAGE 110===
    
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.26 290-3-2-.26 History 
290-3-2-.26 Junior Reserve Officer Training Corps (JROTC) Certificate Approach. 
(1) Overview. A superintendent or administrator who wishes to employ an 
individual as a JROTC instructor may request a JROTC Certificate. 
(2) Application.  
(a) The applicant is required to submit to the employing superintendent or 
administrator the current application for this approach and documentation of having met all 
requirements as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.26 and on the application. 
(b) The superintendent or administrator who wishes to employ the applicant is 
required to submit to the Educator Certification Section: 
1. A recommendation requesting issuance of the JROTC Certificate. 
2. The applicant’s current application and documentation of having met all 
requirements. 
(3) Requirements. All requirements must be successfully completed prior to the 
date the application is received in the Educator Certification Section. 
(a) Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
(b) Verification that the applicant has been recommended and approved by a branch 
of the United States military to serve as a JROTC instructor. Required documentation shall be 
kept on file by the employing superintendent or administrator.  
(4) Alabama Educator Certification Assessment Program (AECAP). The 
applicant must meet the requirements of the AECAP for this approach. 
(5) Degree Level.  The JROTC Certificate will not be issued at a degree level. 
(6) Valid Period. The valid period of the certificate shall be from the date of 
issuance through the remainder of the same scholastic year, and thereafter, for the next five 
consecutive scholastic years. The JROTC Certificate may be reissued by following the sam e 
procedure used in issuing the initial certificate. 
Author: Dr. Thomas R. Bice 
Statutory Authority: Ala. Const. Amend. 284, Ala. Code §§16-3-11, 16-23-1 and 16-23-2 (1975). 
History: Adopted new, 8-4-08, effective 9-18-08; repealed and adopted new 12-9-10, effective 1-14-11; emergency Rule to 
repeal filed 11-14 -13; repealed and adopted new 1-17-14, effective 2-21-14; repealed and adopted new 3-10-16, effective 
4-24-16. 
208 
===PAGE 111===
 
 
  
 
  
  
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.27 290-3-2-.27(7) 
290-3-2-.27 National Board for Professional Teaching Standards (NBPTS) Approach. 
(1) Overview. An individual who holds valid NBPTS certification may seek a 
Professional Educator Certificate. 
(2) Limitations on Issuance . This approach is only available if the applicant’s 
NBPTS certification is in an area, at a grade level, and at a degree level in which Alabama 
offers comparable certification. Additional information about a Professional Educator 
Certificate for teaching fields is in Rule 290-3-2-.03. Additional information about a 
Professional Educator Certificate for areas of instructional support is in Rule 290-3-2-.03. 
(3) Application. The applicant is required to submit to the Educator Certification 
Section the current application for this approach and documentation of having met all 
requirements as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.27 and on the application. 
(4) Requirements. All requirements must be successfully completed prior to the 
date the application is received in the Educator Certification Section. 
(a) Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
(b) Verification on official transcript(s) of all degrees earned. 
(c) For teaching fields, verification on an official transcript(s) of an earned 
bachelor’s or higher degree from a regionally accredited senior institution. 
(d) For areas of instructional support, verification on an official transcript(s) of an 
earned master’s or higher degree from a regionally accredited senior institution. 
(e) Verification of the applicant’s valid NBPTS certification. 
(f) For areas of instructional support, verification on Supplement EXP that the 
applicant has met the professional education work experience required for issuance of the 
Professional Educator Certificate.  Additional information is in Rule 290-3-2-.03. 
(5) Alabama Educator Certification Assessment Program (AECAP). The 
applicant must meet the requirements of the AECAP for this approach.  
(6) Degree Level. The Professional Educator Certificate issued through this 
approach shall be issued at the Class B, A, or AA level based upon: 
(a) The level of the applicant’s highest earned degree from a regionally accredited 
senior institution in the area of the certificate to be issued; or 
(b) The level of the applicant’s highest earned degree from a regionally accredited 
senior institution in an education field. 
(7) Valid Period. The valid period of the certificate shall be from the date of 
issuance through the remainder of the same scholastic year, and thereafter, for the next five 
consecutive scholastic years.  
209 
===PAGE 112===
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.27 History 290-3-2-.27 History 
Author: Dr. Thomas R. Bice 
Statutory Authority: Ala. Const. Amend. 284, Ala. Code §§16-3-11, 16-23-1 and 16-23-2 (1975). 
History: Adopted New, 8-4-08, effective 9- 18-08; repealed and adopted new 12-9-10, effective 1- 14-11; repealed and 
adopted new 3-10-16, effective 4-24-16. 
210 
===PAGE 113===
       
  
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.28 290-3-2-.28 History 
290-3-2-.28 Nationally Certified School Psychologist Approach. 
(1) Overview. An individual who holds valid certification as a Nationally Certified 
School Psychologist may seek a School Psychologist Professional Educator Certificate. 
(2) Application. The applicant is required to submit to the Educator Certification 
Section the current application for this approach and documentation of having met all 
requirements as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.28 and on the application. 
(3) Requirements. All requirements must be successfully completed prior to the 
date the application is received in the Educator Certification Section. 
(a) Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
(b) Verification on official transcript(s) of all degrees earned. 
(c) Verification on an official transcript(s) of an earned master’s or higher degree 
from a regionally accredited senior institution. 
(d) Verification of the applicant’s valid certification as a Nationally Certified 
School Psychologist. 
(4) Alabama Educator Certification Assessment Program (AECAP). The 
applicant must meet the requirements of the AECAP for this approach.  
(5) Degree Level. The Professional Educator Certificate issued through this 
approach shall be issued at the Class A or AA level based upon the applicant’s highest earned 
degree in school psychology from a regionally accredited senior institution. 
(6) Valid Period. The valid period of the certificate shall be from the date of 
issuance through the remainder of the same scholastic year, and thereafter, for the next five 
consecutive scholastic years.  
Author: Dr. Thomas R. Bice 
Statutory Authority: Ala. Const. Amend. 284, Ala. Code §§16-3-11, 16-23-1 and 16-23-2 (1975). 
History: New 12-19-78, repealed 12-8-94, effective 12-31-96; new adopted 12-8-94, effective 1-1-97, repealed 
11-14-96 and amended repealed date of original chapter to 6- 30-97 new adopted 1-9-97 effective 7-1-97; amended: 
6-14-99; effective 7-19-99; amended 9-1-99; effective 10-14-99; amended 01- 11-01, effective 02-15 -01, repealed and new 
adopted 06- 13-02; emergency Rule to appeal and adopt new filed on 6-13 -02; new adopted 8-8-02, effective 9-12-02; 
emergency Rule to appeal and adopt new filed on 10-10 -02; new adopted 12- 12-02, effective 1-16-03; repealed and new 
adopted 09- 11-03 effective 10- 16-03; amended 06- 10-04 effective 07- 15-04; emergency amended Rule adopted 4- 14-05, 
effective 4-14-05; amended Rule adopted 6-9-05, effective 7-14-05; repealed and adopted new, 8-4-08, effective 9-18-08; 
repealed and adopted new 12-9-10, effective 1-14-11; repealed and adopted new 3-10-16, effective 4-24-16. 
211 
===PAGE 114===
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.29 290-3-2-.29(1)(g) 
290-3-2-.29  Renewal Requirements: Continuation or Reinstatement. 
(1) General Requirements for the Continuation of a Valid Renewable 
Professional Educator Certificate, Type Career and Technical Certificate, Level Career 
and Technical Certificate, Specialty Area Career and Technical Certificate, or Degree 
Equivalent Career and Technical Certificate.   
(a) To continue a certificate is to update it without allowing it to expire by meeting 
requirements by June 30 of the year of its expiration. The applicant is required to submit to the 
Educator Certification Section the current application for this approach and it must be received 
in the Section no later than June 30 of the calendar year of expiration of the certificate. The 
applicant must also submit to the Section documentation of having met all requirements no 
later than June 30 of the calendar year of expiration of the certificate. 
(b) Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
(c) All professional educational work experience, allowable credit, and allowable 
professional development applied toward the continuation of a certificate must be completed 
during the valid period of the current certificate, but no later than June 30 of the calendar year 
of expiration of the certificate. 
(d) All Professional Educator Certificates and renewable Career and Technical 
Certificates when continued are valid from the date of issuance through the remainder of the 
same scholastic year, and thereafter, for the next five consecutive scholastic years. 
(e) Certificates may not be continued prior to the calendar year of their expiration. 
(f) If the applicant holds a Professional Leadership Certificate and also holds a 
Professional Educator Certificate, meeting requirements to continue the Professional 
Leadership Certificate will also meet requirements to continue the Professional Educator 
Certificate. If the applicant holds a Professional Leadership Certificate and also holds a 
renewable Career and Technical Certificate, meeting requirements to continue the Professional 
Leadership Certificate will also meet requirements, except for the requirements prescribed in 
Rule 290-3-2-.29(3)(b) and (c), to continue the renewable Career and Technical Certificate. 
Solely meeting requirements to continue the Professional Educator Certificate or renewable 
Career and Technical Certificate will not continue the Professional Leadership Certificate. 
(g) Requirements for the continuation of a Level II Speech-Language Pathology 
Assistant Certificate are in Rule 290-3-2-.30. 
212 
===PAGE 115===
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.29(2)       290-3-2-.29(2)(a)6. 
(2) Requirements for the Continuation of a Valid Renewable Professional 
Educator Certificate.  
(a) A Professional Educator Certificate may be continued with verification of one of 
the following options: 
1. Three full years of full-time professional educational work experience as 
prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.01(34) and fifty clock hours of allowable professional 
development as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.29(12). 
2. Three full years of full-time professional educational work experience as 
prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.01(34) and three semester hours of allowable credit as prescribed 
in Rule 290-3-2-.29(11). 
3. Fifty clock hours of allowable professional development as prescribed in 
Rule 290-3-2-.29(12) and three semester hours of allowable credit as prescribed in 
Rule 290-3-2-.29(11). 
4. Six semester hours of allowable credit as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.29(11). 
5. Valid certification from the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards 
(NBPTS). The NBPTS certification must have been initially issued during the valid period of 
the Professional Educator Certificate currently held. 
6. One hundred clock hours of allowable professional development from the 
providers specified for this option on the current continuation requirements summary sheet 
published by the Educator Certification Section. 
213 
===PAGE 116===
 
   
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.29(3)       290-3-2-.29(3)(e) 
(3) Requirements for the Continuation of a Valid Renewable Type, Level, 
Specialty Area, or Degree Equivalent Career and Technical Certificate. 
(a) A renewable Type, Level, Specialty Area, or Degree Equivalent Career and 
Technical Certificate may be continued with verification of one of the following options: 
1. Three full years of full-time professional educational work experience as 
prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.01(34) and fifty clock hours of allowable professional 
development as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.29(12). 
2. Three full years of full-time professional educational work experience as 
prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.01(34) and three semester hours of allowable credit as prescribed 
in Rule 290-3-2-.29(11). 
3. Fifty clock hours of allowable professional development as prescribed in 
Rule 290-3-2-.29(12) and three semester hours of allowable credit as prescribed in 
Rule 290-3-2-.29(11). 
4. Six semester hours of allowable credit as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.29(11). 
5. Valid certification from the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards 
(NBPTS).  The NBPTS certification must have been initially issued during the valid period of 
the renewable Career and Technical Certificate currently held. 
6. One hundred clock hours of allowable professional development from the 
providers specified for this option on the current continuation requirements summary sheet 
published by the Educator Certification Section. 
(b) The continuation of a Type, Level, Specialty Area, or Degree Equivalent Health 
Science Career and Technical Certificate requires verification of an active Alabama license in 
a registered nursing, paramedical, or an approved allied health specialty. 
(c) The continuation of a Type, Level, Specialty Area, or Degree Equivalent Career 
and Technical Certificate in technical education (with previous approval for the program area 
of cosmetology) or in technical education: cosmetology requires verification of a valid 
Alabama Cosmetology Instructor license. 
(d) A Type II or III Career and Technical Certificate in technical education and/or a 
technical education program area issued on the basis of Rules in effect prior to 
July 1, 1997, could be continued, prior to May 1, 2016. Effective May 1, 2016, these 
certificates may be continued as a Bachelor’s Equivalent in Technical Education 2 Certificate 
in technical education and/or a technical education program area.  
(e) A Type II or III Career and Technical Certificate in health science issued on the 
basis of Rules in effect prior to July 1, 1997, could be continued prior to May 1, 2016. Effective 
May 1, 2016, these certificates may be continued as a Bachelor’s Equivalent in Health Science 
2 Certificate. 
214 
===PAGE 117===
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.29(4)       290-3-2-.29(4)(e) 
(4) General Requirements for the Reinstatement of an Expired Professional 
Educator Certificate, Type Career and Technical Certificate, Level Career and 
Technical Certificate, Specialty Area Career and Technical Certificate, or Degree 
Equivalent Career and Technical Certificate. 
(a) An expired certificate may be reinstated by meeting all current requirements in 
effect at the time the current application for this approach is received in the Educator 
Certification Section. The applicant is required to submit to the Educator Certification Section 
the current application for this approach and documentation of having met all requirements. 
Reinstatement requirements in Rule 290-3-2-.29(5)(a)1. through 3. must be met within the five 
years (60 months) immediately prior to receipt of the current application for this approach in 
the Educator Certification Section.  
(b) Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
(c) Expired certificates may be reinstated, except those designated as not eligible for 
reinstatement in the current edition of the Subject and Personnel Codes of the Alabama State 
Department of Education and those Career and Technical Certificates designated herein as 
certificates that cannot be reinstated. 
(d) All Professional Educator Certificates and renewable Career and Technical 
Certificates when reinstated are valid from the date of issuance through the remainder of the 
same scholastic year, and thereafter, for the next five consecutive scholastic years. 
(e) If the applicant has an expired Professional Leadership Certificate and also has an 
expired Professional Educator Certificate, meeting requirements to reinstate the Professional 
Leadership Certificate through Rule 290-3-2-.29(9)(a)1. will also meet requirements, other 
than the subject area test(s) of the Alabama Educator Certification Assessment Program 
(AECAP), to reinstate the Professional Educator Certificate. If the applicant has an expired 
Professional Leadership Certificate and an expired renewable Career and Technical Certificate, 
meeting requirements to reinstate the Professional Leadership Certificate through 
Rule 290-3-2-.29(9)(a)1. will also meet requirements, except for the requirements prescribed 
in Rule 290-3-2-.29(5)(d) and (e), to reinstate the renewable Career and Technical Certificate. 
Solely meeting requirements to reinstate the Professional Educator Certificate or renewable 
Career and Technical Certificate will not reinstate the Professional Leadership Certificate. 
(f) Requirements of the reinstatement of a Level II Speech-Language Pathology 
Assistant Certificate are in Rule 290-3-2-.30. 
215 
===PAGE 118===
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.29(5) 290-3-2-.29(5)(b)3. 
(5) Requirements for the Reinstatement of an Expired Professional Educator 
Certificate or an Expired Type, Level, Specialty Area, or Degree Equivalent Career and 
Technical Certificate. 
(a) A Professional Educator Certificate that has lapsed for less than twelve months 
may be reinstated with verification of one of the following options: 
1. Nine semester hours of allowable credit, as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.29(11).  
2. Six semester hours of allowable credit, as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.29(11) and 
fifty clock hours of allowable professional development as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.29(12). 
3. One hundred and fifty clock hours of allowable professional development from 
the providers specified for this option on the current reinstatement requirements summary sheet 
published by the Educator Certification Section. 
4. Verification of a passing score(s) on the current Alabama-approved Praxis II 
subject area test(s) of the Alabama Educator Certification Assessment Program (AECAP). 
(i) Each area of certification for which reinstatement is sought requires a passing 
score(s) on the current Praxis II subject area test(s). 
(ii) The Praxis II subject area test(s) must be passed on a test administration date after 
the most recent expiration date of the certificate(s) to be reinstated. 
(iii) If a Praxis II subject area test(s) is not available for the lapsed area of certification, 
a reinstatement option as outlined in Rule 290-3-2-.29(5)(a)1. through 3. above must be met. 
(b) A Professional Educator Certificate that has lapsed for more than twelve months 
must be reinstated with verification of a passing score(s) on the current Alabama-approved 
Praxis II subject area test(s) of the Alabama Educator Certification Assessment Program 
(AECAP). 
1. Each area of certification for which reinstatement is sought requires a passing 
score(s) on the current Praxis II subject area test(s). 
2. The Praxis II subject area test(s) must be passed on a test administration date after 
the most recent expiration date of the certificate(s) to be reinstated. 
3. If a Praxis II subject area test(s) is not available for the lapsed area of certification, 
a reinstatement option as outlined in Rule 290-3-2-.29(5)(a)1. through 3. above must be met. 
216 
===PAGE 119===
 
 
      
   
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.29(5)(c)       290-3-2-.29(5)(h) 
(c) A renewable Type, Level, Specialty Area, or Degree Equivalent Career and 
Technical Certificate may be reinstated with verification of one of the following options: 
1. Nine semester hours of allowable credit, as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.29(11).  
2. Six semester hours of allowable credit, as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.29(11) and 
fifty clock hours of allowable professional development as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.29(12). 
3. One hundred and fifty clock hours of allowable professional development from 
the providers specified for this option on the current reinstatement requirements summary sheet 
published by the Educator Certification Section. 
(d) The reinstatement of a renewable Type, Level, or Degree Equivalent Health 
Science Career and Technical Certificate requires verification of an active Alabama license in 
a registered nursing, paramedical, or an approved allied health specialty. 
(e) The reinstatement of a renewable Type, Level, Specialty Area, or Degree 
Equivalent Career and Technical Certificate in technical education (with previous approval for 
the program area of cosmetology) or in technical education: cosmetology requires verification 
of a valid Alabama Cosmetology Instructor license. 
(f) Type II and III Career and Technical Certificates in technical education and/or a 
technical education program area issued on the basis of Rules in effect prior to July 1, 1997, 
could not be reinstated prior to May 1, 2016. Effective May 1, 2016, these certificates may be 
reinstated as a Bachelor’s Equivalent in Technical Education 2 Career and Technical 
Certificate in technical education and/or a technical education program area.  
(g) Type II and III Career and Technical Certificates in  health science issued on the 
basis of Rules in effect prior to July 1, 1997, could not be reinstated prior to May 1, 2016. 
Effective May 1, 2016, these certificates may be reinstated as a Bachelor’s Equivalent in Health 
Science 2 Career and Technical Certificate. 
(h) Type I Career and Technical Certificates in technical education or health 
science/healthcare science and technology that expired cannot be reinstated. In this case, an 
applicant who is seeking a current Career and Technical Certificate in a technical education 
program area must meet the requirements for a Bachelor’s Equivalent in Technical Education 
1 Certificate in a technical education program area as a prerequisite to the Degree Equivalent 
in Technical Education 2, 3, 4, or 5 in a technical education program area. An applicant who 
is seeking a current Career and Technical Certificate in health science must meet the 
requirements for a Bachelor’s Equivalent in H ealth Science 1 Certificate as a prerequisite to 
the Degree Equivalent in Health Science 2, 3, or 4 Certificates. 
217 
===PAGE 120===
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.29(6)      290-3-2-.29(7)(b) 
(6) General Requirements for the Continuation of a Valid Renewable 
Professional Leadership Certificate. 
(a) To continue a certificate is to update it without allowing it to expire by meeting 
requirements no later than June 30 of the year of its expiration. The applicant is required to 
submit to the Educator Certification Section the current application for this approach and it 
must be received in the Section no later than June 30 of the calendar year of expiration of the 
certificate. The applicant must also submit to the Section documentation of having met all 
requirements no later than June 30 of the calendar year of expiration of the certificate. 
(b) Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
(c) All Professional Learning Units (PLUs) applied toward the continuation of a 
certificate must be completed during the valid period of the current certificate, but no later than 
June 30 of the calendar year of expiration of the certificate. Additional information is in Rule 
290-3-2-.29(12). 
(d) All Professional Leadership Certificates when continued are valid from the date 
of issuance through the remainder of the same scholastic year, and thereafter, for the next five 
consecutive scholastic years. 
(e) Certificates may not be continued prior to the calendar year of their expiration. 
(f) If the applicant holds a Professional Leadership Certificate and also holds a 
Professional Educator Certificate, meeting requirements to continue the Professional 
Leadership Certificate will also meet requirements to continue the Professional Educator 
Certificate. If the applicant holds a Professional Leadership Certificate and also holds a 
renewable Career and Technical Certificate, meeting requirements to continue the Professional 
Leadership Certificate will also meet requirements, except for the requirements prescribed in 
Rule 290-3-2-.29(3)(b) and (c), to continue the renewable Career and Technical Certificate. 
Solely meeting requirements to continue the Professional Educator Certificate or renewable 
Career and Technical Certificate will not continue the Professional Leadership Certificate. 
(7) Requirements for the Continuation of a Valid Renewable Professional 
Leadership Certificate. 
(a) A Professional Leadership Certificate may be continued with verification of five 
Professional Learning Units (PLUs). At least two PLUs MUST be earned through 
ACLD-approved Professional Studies. There are two categories of approved PLUs: 
ACLD-approved and locally approved through either an Alabama city/county superintendent 
or an administrator of an Alabama nonpublic school. 
(b) Additional information regarding Professional Learning Units (PLUs) is in 
Rule 290-3-2-.29(12). 
218 
===PAGE 121===
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.29(8)       290-3-2-.29(9)(a)1. 
(8) General Requirements for the Reinstatement of an Expired Professional 
Leadership Certificate. 
(a) An expired certificate may be reinstated by meeting all current requirements in 
effect at the time the current application for this approach is received in the Educator 
Certification Section. The applicant is required to submit to the Educator Certification Section 
the current application for this approach and documentation of having met all requirements. 
Reinstatement requirements in Rule 290-3-2-.29(9)(a)1. must be met within the five years 
(60 months) immediately prior to receipt of the current application for this approach in the 
Educator Certification Section.  
(b) Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
(c) Expired certificates may be reinstated except those designated as not eligible for 
reinstatement in the current edition of the Subject and Personnel Codes of the Alabama State 
Department of Education. 
(d) All Professional Leadership Certificates when reinstated are valid from the date 
of issuance through the remainder of the same scholastic year, and thereafter, for the next five 
consecutive scholastic years. 
(e) If the applicant has an expired Professional Leadership Certificate and also has 
an expired Professional Educator Certificate, meeting requirements to reinstate the 
Professional Leadership Certificate through Rule 290-3-2-.29(9)(a)1. will also meet 
requirements, other than the subject area test(s) of the Alabama Educator Certification 
Assessment Program (AECAP), to reinstate the Professional Educator Certificate. If the 
applicant has an expired Professional Leadership Certificate and an expired renewable Career 
and Technical Certificate, meeting requirements to reinstate the Professional Leadership 
Certificate through Rule 290-3-2-.29(9)(a)1. will also meet requirements, except for the 
requirements prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.29(5)(d) and (e), to reinstate the renewable Career 
and Technical Certificate.  Solely meeting requirements to reinstate the Professional Educator 
Certificate or renewable Career and Technical Certificate will not reinstate the Professional 
Leadership Certificate. 
(9) Requirements for the Reinstatement of an Expired Professional Leadership 
Certificate. 
(a) A Professional Leadership Certificate that has lapsed for less than twelve months 
may be reinstated with verification of one of the following options: 
1. Verification of six Professional Learning Units (PLUs).  At least 3 PLUs MUST 
be earned through ACLD-approved Professional Studies. There are two categories of approved 
PLUs: ACLD-approved and locally approved through either an Alabama city/county 
superintendent or an administrator of an Alabama nonpublic school. Additional information 
regarding Professional Learning Units (PLUs) is in Rule 290-3-2-.29(12). 
219 
===PAGE 122===
     
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.29(9)(a)2.  290-3-2-.29(11)(c)1.(ii) 
2. Verification of a passing score(s) on the current Alabama-approved Praxis II 
subject area test(s) of the Alabama Educator Certification Assessment Program (AECAP). 
(i) Each area of certification for which reinstatement is sought requires a passing 
score(s) on the current Praxis II subject area test(s). 
(ii) The Praxis II subject area test(s) must be passed on a test administration date after 
the most recent expiration date of the certificate(s) to be reinstated. 
(b) A Professional Leadership Certificate that has lapsed for more than twelve 
months must be reinstated with verification of a passing score(s) on the current        
Alabama-approved Praxis II subject area test(s) of the Alabama Educator Certification 
Assessment Program (AECAP). 
1. Each area of certification for which reinstatement is sought requires a passing 
score(s) on the current Praxis II subject area test(s). 
2. The Praxis II subject area test(s) must be passed on a test administration date after 
the most recent expiration date of the certificate(s) to be reinstated. 
(10) Renewal or Reissuance of Other Certificates. Information about the 
requirements for renewing or reissuing other types of certificates are in the Rule for the specific 
type of certificate. 
(11) Allowable Credit. 
(a) Semester or quarter hours of college or university credit, earned and applied 
toward the renewal of a Professional Educator Certificate, Professional Leadership Certificate, 
or a renewable Type, Level, Specialty Area, or Degree Equivalent Career and Technical 
Certificate must be completed at a regionally accredited senior institution. Clock hours of 
professional development are not equivalent to college course credit. 
(b) Appropriate course content. The allowable credit must be earned in one of the 
following: 
1. A State/state-approved educator preparation program in the teaching field or area 
of instructional support of the certificate(s) held. 
2. A State/state-approved educator preparation program in a different teaching field 
or area of instructional support. 
3. An academic content course in the teaching field or area of instructional support 
of the certificate(s) held. 
4. The teaching field or area of instructional support at the doctoral level of the 
certificate(s) held.  
(c) Appropriate level and minimum grade requirement of coursework earned towards 
renewal. Allowable credit must meet one of the following criteria: 
1. Upper division or graduate level courses with a grade of “C’ or above in each 
course completed for credit towards the renewal of a: 
(i) Class B Professional Educator Certificate; 
(ii) Type II or Type III Career and Technical Certificate; 
220 
===PAGE 123===
       
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.29(11)(c)1.(iii) 290-3-2-.29(12)(c) 
(iii) Level 2, Level 3, or Level 4 Career and Technical Certificate in technical 
education or a technical education program area;  
(iv) Specialty Area 2, 3, or 4 Career and Technical Certificate in technical education 
or a technical education program area; 
(v) Degree Equivalent Technical Education 2, 3, or 4 Career and Technical 
Certificate; 
(vi) Level 4 Career and Technical Certificate in health science; 
(vii) Specialty Area 2, 3, or 4 Career and Technical Certificate in health science; or 
(viii) Degree Equivalent Health Science 2 or 3 Career and Technical Certificate. 
2. Graduate level courses completed for graduate credit with a grade of “B” or above 
in each course completed for credit towards the renewal of a: 
(i) Class A or Class AA Professional Educator Certificate; 
(ii) Class A or Class AA Professional Leadership Certificate; 
(iii) Level II Speech-Language Pathology Assistant Certificate; 
(iv) Level 5 or a Specialty Area 5 Career and Technical Certificate in technical 
education or a technical education program area or health science; or 
(v) Sixth-year Equivalent Technical Education 5 Certificate. 
(vi)   Sixth-year Equivalent Health Science 4 Certificate. 
(d) Allowable credits must be verified on an official transcript. 
(12) Allowable Professional Development: Clock Hours of Professional 
Development and Professional Learning Units (PLUs). Professional development is defined 
in Rule 290-3-2-.01(33). 
(a) Clock hours of professional development earned and applied toward renewal 
must meet all of the following requirements: 
1. Based on the individual's professional growth needs as identified through 
performance evaluations, if employed. 
2. Related to professional education with consideration given to the sponsoring 
organization, the professional qualifications of the presenter and the purposes, goals and 
evaluation of the activity. 
3. Consistent with the Alabama Standards for Professional Development as 
prescribed in Rule 290-4-3-.01. 
(b) Allowable professional development must be verified as prescribed on the 
appropriate renewal summary sheet available at www.alsde.edu. 
(c) Allowable professional development used to meet the one hundred or one hundred 
and fifty clock hour options, must be completed through the providers specified for these 
options on the current renewal summary sheet published by the Educator Certification Section. 
221 
===PAGE 124===
--
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.29(12)(d)       290-3-2-.29 History 
(d) PLUs for instructional leadership are a content driven, long-term unit of 
professional study for instructional leaders that fully addresses all knowledge and ability 
indicators under an Alabama Standard for Instructional Leaders. PLUs are defined in 
Rule 290-3-2-.01(38). 
1. PLUs shall be required for renewal of a Professional Leadership Certificate. 
2. PLUs must be approved by one of the following: 
(i) The Alabama Council for Leadership Development (ACLD); or 
(ii) An Alabama superintendent or an administrator of an Alabam non-public school. 
(13) Historical Information. On July 1, 1979, the Alabama State Board of Education 
adopted revised Teacher Education and Certification requirements which included provisions 
for a nonrenewable Class A Professional Educator Certificate for the Principal, Superintendent, 
Superintendent-Principal, Vocational Administrator, Supervisor of Attendance or General 
Supervisor issued to persons who began graduate study on or after June 1, 1979. On January 
9, 1997, the Alabama State Board of Education adopted a new Teacher Certification Chapter 
of the Alabama Administrative Code. The new Chapter allowed these nonrenewable 
certificates to become renewable. 
Author: Dr. Thomas R. Bice. 
Statutory Authority: Ala. Const. Amend. 284, Ala. Code §§16-3-11, 16-23-1 and 16-23-2 (1975). 
History: Adopted new, 8-4-08, effective 9-18-08; repealed and adopted new, 12-9-10, effective 1-14-11; emergency Rule to 
repeal filed 11-14 -13; repealed and adopted new 1-17- 14, effective 2-21-14 ; repealed and adopted new 3-10-16, effective 
4-24-16. 
222 
===PAGE 125===
     
    
       
  
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.30 290-3-2-.30(3)(c)2. 
290-3-2-.30 Speech-Language Pathology Assistant (SLA) Certificate Approach. 
(1) Overview of the SLA Certificate. A public school superintendent may request 
a nonrenewable Level I SLA Certificate, valid for three scholastic years, to employ an applicant 
who has an earned bachelor’s degree from a regionally accredited senior institution in 
speech-language pathology or communication sciences and disorders (with a speech-language 
emphasis) as a full-time speech-language pathology assistant under appropriate supervision. 
Requirements for issuance of a renewable Level II SLA Certificate, valid for five scholastic 
years, include 12 semester hours of graduate credit in an Alabama-approved Alternative Class 
A program in an area of special education and/or a master’s degree level speech -language 
pathology program that holds accreditation by the Council on Academic Accreditation in 
Audiology and Speech-Language Pathology (CAA). 
(2) Limitations on Issuance and Proper Certification.  
(a) An administrator of a nonpublic school may not recommend issuance of a SLA 
Certificate. 
(b) An SLA Certificate is not appropriate certification for any other assignment. 
(c) A superintendent who fails to provide an appropriate supervisor as required in 
Rule 290-3-2-.30(3)(f) forfeits the opportunity to request SLA Certificates in the future. 
(3) Requirements for Issuance of a Nonrenewable Level I SLA Certificate. A 
Level I SLA Certificate, which is valid for three scholastic years and is not renewable, may be 
issued when all of the following requirements have been met: 
(a) A criminal history background check as required by the Alabama Child Protection 
Act of 1999, as amended, and Rule 290-3-2-.02(8). 
(b) A recommendation on the current application for this approach from a 
superintendent who wishes to employ the applicant as a full-time speech-language pathology 
assistant. 
(c) An earned bachelor’s degree with a minimum overall grade point average (GPA) 
of at least 2.5 from a regionally accredited senior institution in speech-language pathology or 
communication sciences and disorders (with a speech-language emphasis). For issuance of 
the Level I SLA with a valid period beginning July 1, 2017, and thereafter, the bachelor’s 
degree must be posted with a minimum overall GPA of at least 2.75. The overall GPA is 
the GPA posted on the official transcript of the degree granting institution that was used as the 
basis for granting the degree. 
1. The degree must be earned prior to October 1 in order for the SLA Certificate to 
be valid the previous July 1. 
2. The GPA requirement does not apply to an applicant holding a valid Professional 
Educator Certificate or a valid Professional Leadership Certificate. 
223 
===PAGE 126===
   
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.30(3)(d) 290-3-2-.30(4)(e)1. 
(d) For certificates with a valid period beginning prior to July 1, 2011, verification of 
current passing scores attained on the basic skills assessments and the Praxis II subject 
assessment of the Alabama Educator Certification Assessment Program (AECAP) on test 
administration dates prior to May 1 of the first scholastic year of the valid period of the Level 
I SLA Certificate. The Praxis II requirement becomes effective when a subject assessment is 
implemented. Additional information is in Rule 290-3-2-.01(6). 
(e) Verification of current passing scores attained on the basic skills assessments and 
the Praxis II subject area test(s) of the Alabama Educator Certification Assessment Program 
(AECAP) on test administration dates prior to October 1 of the first scholastic year of the valid 
period of the Level I SLA Certificate. The Praxis II requirement becomes effective when a 
subject area test(s) is implemented. Additional information is in Rule 290-3-2-.01(6). 
(f) The employing superintendent’s designation of an appropriate supervisor who is 
one of the following:  
1. A speech-language pathologist who holds a valid Class A or Class AA 
Professional Educator Certificate in speech or language impairment. 
2. A special education coordinator or special education supervisor who holds a valid 
Professional Educator Certificate in an area of special education.  
(g) All other requirements on the current application for this approach. 
(4) Requirements for Issuance of a Renewable Level II SLA Certificate . A 
Level II SLA Certificate, which is valid for five scholastic years and is renewable, may be 
issued when all of the following requirements have been met: 
(a) A recommendation on the current application for this approach from a 
superintendent who wishes to employ the applicant as a full-time speech-language pathology 
assistant. 
(b) A valid or expired Level I SLA Certificate. 
(c) Verification on Supplement EXP of at least two full years of full-time 
employment in one or more Alabama public school systems as a speech-language pathology 
assistant, while holding a valid Level I SLA Certificate. 
(d) Verification on Supplement SLA-S that the two years of employment required in 
Rule 290-3-2-.30(4)(c) were supervised by an appropriate supervisor as required in 
Rule 290-3-2-.30(3)(f). 
(e) Documentation of having completed one of the following prior to October 1 of 
the scholastic year for which the Level II SLA Certificate is to be issued: 
1. A valid Class A Professional Educator Certificate in an area of special education. 
224 
===PAGE 127===
      
 
  
   
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.30(4)(e)2. 290-3-2-.30(5)(a)1.(iv) 
2. Twelve semester hours of graduate credit w ith a grade of “B” or above from a 
regionally accredited senior institution. The credit must be from one of the following three 
options: 
(i) An Alternative Class A special education program. 
(ii) A master’s degree level speech -language pathology program that holds 
accreditation by the Council of Academic Accreditation in Audiology and Speech-Language 
Pathology (CAA). 
(iii) A combination of courses from (i) and (ii). 
3. Verification of a current passing score attained on the prescribed Praxis II subject 
area test(s) of the Alabama Educator Certification Assessment Program (AECAP) on a test 
administration date prior to October 1 of the scholastic year for which the Level II SLA 
Certificate is to be issued. The Praxis II requirement becomes effective when a subject area 
test(s) is implemented. Additional information is in Rule 290-3-2-.01(6). 
(f) Other requirements on the current application for this approach, which include 
the employing superintendent’s designation of an appropriate supervisor as required in 
Rule 290-3-2-.30(3)(f). 
(5) Requirements for the Renewal of a Level II SLA Certificate.  
(a) Continuation of a Level II SLA Certificate may be requested on the current 
application for this approach by a public school superintendent who wishes to employ the 
applicant as a full-time speech-language pathology assistant when all requirements have been 
met. All requirements to be applied toward the continuation of a certificate must be completed 
during the valid period of the current certificate, but no later than June 30 of the calendar year 
of expiration of the certificate.  
1. If the individual holds a valid Class A Professional Educator Certificate in an area 
of special education: 
(i) Verification on Supplement EXP of at least three full years of full-time 
employment in one or more Alabama public school systems as a speech-language pathology 
assistant, while holding a valid Level II SLA Certificate. In addition to the experience, one of 
the following options must be met: 
(I) Fifty clock hours of allowable professional development. Additional information 
is in Rule 290-3-2-.29(12). 
(II) Three semester hours of allowable credit. Additional information is in 
Rule 290-3-2-.29(11). 
(ii) Verification on Supplement SLA-S that the three years of employment required 
in Rule 290-3-2-.30(5)(a)1.(i) were supervised by an appropriate supervisor as required in 
Rule 290-3-2-.30(3)(f). 
(iii) Other requirements on the current application for this approach, including the 
employing superintendent’s designation of an appropriate supervisor as required in 
Rule 290-3-2-.30(3)(f). 
(iv) Other requirements applicable to renewing an Alabama certificate. Additional 
information is in Rule 290-3-2-.29. 
225 
===PAGE 128===
      
 
 
   
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.30(5)(a)2. 290-3-2-.30(5)(a)2.(vi) 
2. If the individual does not hold a valid Class A Professional Educator Certificate 
in an area of special education: 
(i) Verification on Supplement EXP of at least three full years of full-time 
employment in one or more Alabama public school systems as a speech-language pathology 
assistant, while holding a valid Level II SLA Certificate. 
(ii) Verification on Supplement SLA-S that the three years of employment required 
in Rule 290-3-2-.30(5)(a)2.(i) were supervised by an appropriate supervisor as required in 
Rule 290-3-2-.30(3)(f). 
(iii) Unless the individual has completed all courses and other Alternative Class A 
State-approved program requirements except the internship, twelve additional semester hours 
of graduate credit with a grade of “B” or above from a regionally accredited senior institution. 
The credit must be earned during the valid period of the Level II SLA Certificate to be renewed 
but no later than June 30 of the calendar year of expiration of the certificate. The credit must 
be from one of the following three options: 
(I) An Alternative Class A special education program. 
(II) A master’s degree level speech -language pathology program that holds 
accreditation by the Council on Academic Accreditation in Audiology and Speech-Language 
Pathology (CAA). 
(III) A combination of courses from (I) and (II). 
(iv) The requirement for 12 additional semester hours of graduate credit earned during 
the valid period of the Level II SLA Certificate to be renewed continues until the individual 
completes one of the following: 
(I) Earns a master’s degree in speech -language pathology or communication 
sciences and disorders (with a speech-language emphasis) and holds at least a Class A 
Professional Educator Certificate in speech and language impairment; 
(II) Holds a valid Class A Professional Educator Certificate in an area of special 
education; or 
(III) Completes all courses and other Alternative Class A State-approved program 
requirements for a Class A Professional Educator Certificate in an area of special education 
except the internship.  
(v) Other requirements on the current application for this approach, including the 
employing superintendent’s designation of an appropriate supervisor as required in 
Rule 290-3-2-.30(3)(f). 
(vi) Other requirements applicable to renewing an Alabama certificate. Additional 
information is in Rule 290-3-2-.29. 
226 
===PAGE 129===
      
 
     
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.30(5)(b) 290-3-2-.30 History 
(b) Reinstatement of an expired Level II SLA Certificate may be requested on the 
current application for this approach by a public school superintendent who wishes to employ 
the individual as a full-time speech-language pathology assistant when all requirements have 
been met. 
1. If the individual held a Class A Professional Educator Certificate in an area of 
special education, requirements for reinstatement of a Level II SLA Certificate are the same 
as the requirements for reinstatement of a Class A Professional Educator Certificate found in 
Rule 290-3-2-.29. Additional information about allowable credit is in Rule 290-3-2-.29(11). 
Additional information about allowable professional development is in Rule 290-3-2-.29(12). 
2. If the individual does not hold a valid Class A Professional Educator Certificate 
in an area of special education: 
(i) Eighteen additional semester hours of graduate credit with a grade of “B” or 
above from a regionally accredited senior institution. The credit must be earned within the five 
years prior to the beginning date of the reinstated certificate and prior to October 1 of the 
scholastic year for which the new Level II SLA Certificate is to be issued. The credit must be 
from one of the following three options: 
(I) An Alabama Alternative Class A special education program. 
(II) A master’s degree level speech -language pathology program that holds 
accreditation by the Council on Academic Accreditation in Audiology and 
Speech-Language Pathology (CAA). 
(III) A combination of courses from (I) and (II). 
3. All other requirements on the current application for this approach, which include 
the employer’s designation of an appropriate supervisor as required in Rule 290-3-2-.30(3)(e). 
4. All current requirements of the Alabama Educator Certification Assessment 
Program (AECAP). Additional information is in Rule 290-3-2-.01(6). 
(6) Valid Period. 
(a) The Level I SLA Certificate shall be valid for three scholastic years and is not 
renewable.   
(b) The Level II SLA shall be valid for five scholastic years and is renewable. 
Additional information about renewing a Level II SLA is in Rule 290-3-2-.30(5). 
(7) Historical Information. Class B Professional Educator Certificates in speech or 
language impairment have not been initially issued with a valid period beginning after 
July 1, 2007. 
Author: Dr. Thomas R. Bice 
Statutory Authority: Ala. Const. Amend. 284, Ala. Code §§16-3-11, 16-23-1 and 16-23-2 (1975). 
History: Adopted new, 8-4-08, effective 9-18-08; repealed and adopted new 12-9-10, effective 1-14-11; repealed and adopted 
new 3-10-16, effective 4-24-16. 
227 
===PAGE 130===
  
  
    
 
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.31 290-3-2-.31 History 
290-3-2-.31 Speech-Language Pathology Professional Educator Certificate (SLPEC) 
Approach. 
(1) Overview. An individual may seek certification in the instructional support 
area of speech-language pathology. A SLPEC allows the holder to serve only as a speech-
language pathologist. 
(2) Application. The applicant is required to submit to the Educator 
Certification Section the current application for this approach and documentation of having 
met all requirements as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.31 and on the application. 
(3) Requirements. All requirements must be successfully completed prior to 
the date the application is received in the Educator Certification Section. 
(a) Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in    
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
(b) Verification on official transcript(s) of all degrees earned. 
(c) Verification on an official transcript(s) of an earned master’s or higher 
degree from a regionally accredited senior institution. 
(d) Verification, on the current application for this approach, of completion of 
a master’s degree level speech-language pathology program that was accredited by the 
Council on Academic Accreditation (CAA) of the American Speech-Language Hearing 
Association (ASHA) at the time of program completion. 
(e) Verification, on the current application for this approach, of satisfactory 
performance on the CAA-prescribed Praxis II test(s). 
(f) Verification of the applicant’s valid speech -language pathology license o r 
valid renewal card issued by any state’s board of examiners in speech pathology and 
audiology. 
(4) Degree Level. The Professional Educator Certificate issued through this 
approach shall be issued at the Class A (master’s degree) level. 
(5) Valid Period. The valid period of the SLPEC shall be from the date of 
issuance through the remainder of the same scholastic year, and thereafter, for the next five 
consecutive scholastic years.  
Author: Dr. Thomas R. Bice 
Statutory Authority: Ala. Const. Amend. 284, Ala. Code §§16-3-11, 16-23-1 and 16-23-2 (1975). 
History: Adopted new 3-10-16, effective 4-24-16. 
228 
===PAGE 131===
     
    
  
  
 
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.32 290-3-2-.32 History 
290-3-2-.32 Speech-Language Pathology Temporary Certificate (SLTC) Approach. 
(1) Overview. A superintendent or administrator who wishes to employ an 
individual as a speech-language pathologist may request a SLTC. This certificate may be 
requested for an individual who does not hold a valid speech-language pathology license 
or valid renewal card issued by any state’s board of examiners in speech pathology and 
audiology.  The SLTC is not an alternative certificate.  A SLTC allows the holder to serve 
only as a speech-language pathologist. 
(2) Application. 
(a) The applicant is required to submit to the employing superintendent or 
administrator the current application for this approach and documentation of having met 
all requirements as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.32 and on the application. 
(b) The superintendent or administrator who wishes to employ the applicant as 
a speech-language pathologist is required to submit to the Educator Certification Section: 
1. A recommendation requesting issuance of the SLTC. 
2. The applicant’s current application and documentation of having met all 
requirements. 
(3) Requirements. All requirements must be successfully completed prior to 
the date the application is received in the Educator Certification Section. 
(a) Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in                          
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
(b) Verification on official transcript(s) of all degrees earned. 
(c) Verification on an official transcript(s) of an earned master’s or higher 
degree from a regionally accredited senior institution. 
(d) Verification, on the current application for this approach, of completion of 
a master’s degree level speech-language pathology program that was accredited by the 
Council on Academic Accreditation (CAA) of the American Speech-Language Hearing 
Association (ASHA) at the time of program completion. 
(e) Verification, on the current application for this approach, of satisfactory 
performance on the CAA-prescribed Praxis II test(s). 
(4) Degree Level.  The SLTC shall be issued at the master’s degree level. 
(5) Valid Period. The valid period of the SLTC shall be from the date of 
issuance through the remainder of the same scholastic year, and thereafter, for the next 
consecutive scholastic year. The SLTC shall not be continued, renewed, reinstated, or 
reissued. 
Author: Dr. Thomas R. Bice 
Statutory Authority: Ala. Const. Amend. 284, Ala. Code §§16-3-11, 16-23-1 and 16-23-2 (1975). 
History: Adopted new, 3-10-16, effective 4-24-16. 
229 
===PAGE 132===
 
  
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.33 290-3-2-.33(4) 
290-3-2-.33 State-Approved Program Approach. 
(1) Overview. An individual who completes a State-approved program as prescribed 
in the Educator Preparation Chapter of the Alabama Administrative Code may be eligible for 
a Professional Educator Certificate or Professional Leadership Certificate. 
(2)    General Information. 
(a) An individual who completes a State-approved program must be recommended 
for certification by the certification officer of the institution where the program was completed. 
(b) The application must be received in the Educator Certification Section within 60 
calendar months of the date of program completion specified on the current recommendation 
form. 
(c) An individual whose application is not received in the Educator Certification 
Section within the 60 calendar months must meet requirements of the most recent State-
approved program at the same institution or at another institution, or meet all requirements of 
another State-approved approach. 
(d) The applicant must meet all State requirements for certification, including the 
Alabama Special Requirements in Rule 290-3-2-.02(4), in effect at the time the application is 
received in the Educator Certification Section. 
(3) Application. 
(a) The applicant is required to submit to the certification officer at the institution 
where the State-approved program was completed the current application for this approach. 
(b) The certification officer at the institution where the State-approved program was 
completed is required to submit to the Educator Certification Section: 
1. A recommendation on the current application for this approach and documentation 
of the applicant having met all certification requirements and all requirements of the 
State-approved program as prescribed in the Educator Preparation Chapter of the Alabama 
Administrative Code. 
2. The applicant’s current application for this approach. 
(4) Class B State-approved Programs for Teaching Fields lead to an initial 
Professional Educator Certificate at the bachelor’s degree level. Additional information 
regarding Class B State-approved programs may be found in the Educator Preparation Chapter 
of the Alabama Administrative Code. Available program teaching fields include: 
(a) Early childhood education, elementary education, early childhood special 
education, and collaborative special education grades K-6 or 6-12. 
(b) Middle-level or secondary single teaching fields. 
(c) Comprehensive middle level or secondary teaching fields (English language arts, 
general science, or general social studies) or career and technical education teaching fields. 
(d) Preschool through grade 12 programs (visual arts, dance, choral or instrumental 
music, languages other than English, physical education, and theatre). 
230 
===PAGE 133===
  
 
 
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.33(5) 290-3-2-.33(8) 
(5) Alternative Class A State-approved Programs for Teaching Fields lead to an 
initial Professional Educator Certificate at th e master’s degree level. Additional information 
regarding Alternative Class A State-approved programs may be found in the Educator 
Preparation Chapter of the Alabama Administrative Code. Available program teaching fields 
include: 
(a) Early childhood education, elementary education, early childhood special 
education, and collaborative special education grades K-6 or 6-12. 
(b) Middle-level or secondary single teaching fields. 
(c) Comprehensive middle level or secondary teaching fields (English language arts, 
general science, or general social studies) or career and technical education teaching fields. 
(d) Preschool through grade 12 programs (visual arts, dance, choral or instrumental 
music, languages other than English, physical education, theatre, and certain areas of special 
education). 
(6) Class A State-approved Programs for Teaching Fields lead to a Class A 
Professional Educator Certificate at the master’s degree level. A dditional information 
regarding Class A State-approved programs for teaching fields may be found in the Educator 
Preparation Chapter of the Alabama Administrative Code. Available program teaching fields 
include: 
(a) Advanced certification in the same teaching fields for which Class B certification 
is available. 
(b) Initial certification in English for speakers of other languages, reading specialist, 
and certain areas of special education. 
(7) Class A State-approved Programs for Areas of Instructional Support lead to 
a Class A Professional Educator Certificate or Professional Leadership Certificate at the 
master’s degree level. Additional information regarding Class A State -approved programs in 
areas of instructional support may be found in the Educator Preparation Chapter of the 
Alabama Administrative Code. Available program areas of instructional support include 
instructional leadership (formerly educational administration), library-media, school 
counseling, school psychometry, speech-language pathology, and sport management. 
(8) Class AA State-approved Programs for Teaching Fields lead to a Class AA 
Professional Educator Certificate at the sixth-year level. Some institutions require program 
completers to earn an education specialist degree. Additional information regarding Class AA 
State-approved programs for teaching fields may be found in the Educator Preparation Chapter 
of the Alabama Administrative Code. Available program teaching fields include initial 
certification in special education and teacher leader, and advanced certification in the same 
teaching fields for which Class B and Class A certification is available. 
231 
===PAGE 134===
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.33(9) 290-3-2-.33 History 
(9) Class AA State-approved Programs for Areas of Instructional Support lead 
to a Class AA Professional Educator Certificate or Professional Leadership Certificate on the 
sixth-year level. Some institutions require program completers to earn the education specialist 
degree. Additional information regarding Class AA State-approved programs in areas of 
instructional support may be found in the Educator Preparation Chapter of the Alabama 
Administrative Code. Available program areas of instructional support include: 
(a) Initial certification in school psychology. 
(b) Advanced certification in instructional leadership, library-media, school 
counseling, speech-language pathology, and sport management. 
(10)  Alabama Educator Certification Assessment Program (AECAP). An applicant 
through the State-approved program approach must meet the requirements of the AECAP in 
effect on the date the application is received in the Educator Certification Section. Additional 
information is in Rule 290-3-2-.02(9). 
Author: Dr. Thomas R. Bice 
Statutory Authority: Ala. Code §§16-3-11, 16-23-1 and 16-23-2 (1975). 
History: New 12-19 -78, repealed 12-8-94, effective 12-31-96; new adopted 12-8-94, effective 1-1-97, repealed 
11-14-96 and amended repealed date of original chapter to 6- 30-97 new adopted 1-9-97 effective 7-1-97; amended: 
6-14-99; effective 7-19-99; amended 9-1-99; effective 10-14-99; amended 01- 11-01, effective 02-15 -01, repealed and new 
adopted 06- 13-02; emergency Rule to appeal and adopt new filed on 6-13 -02; new adopted 8-8-02, effective 9-12-02; 
emergency Rule to appeal and adopt new filed on 10-10 -02; new adopted 12- 12-02, effective 1-16-03; repealed and new 
adopted 09- 11-03 effective 10- 16-03; amended 06- 10-04 effective 07- 15-04; emergency amended Rule adopted 4- 14-05, 
effective 4-14-05; amended Rule adopted 6-9-05, effective 7-14-05; repealed and adopted new, 8-4-08, effective 9-18-08; 
repealed and adopted new 12-9-10, effective 1-14-11; repealed and adopted new 3-10-16, effective 4-24-16. 
232 
===PAGE 135===
    
SUPP. NO. 16-1 EDUCATOR CERTIFICATION 
290-3-2-.34 290-3-2-.34 History 
290-3-2-.34 Substitute Teacher License. 
(1) Overview. A superintendent or administrator who wishes to employ an 
individual as a substitute teacher may request a Substitute Teacher License. An individual who 
holds a valid Substitute Teacher License may be employed as a substitute in any Alabama 
public or nonpublic school. 
(2) Restriction. A Substitute Teacher License may not be used as the basis for 
employment as a regular, full-time teacher. 
(3) Application.  
(a) The applicant is required to submit to the employing superintendent or 
administrator the current application for this approach and documentation of having met all 
requirements as prescribed in Rule 290-3-2-.34 and on the application. 
(b) The superintendent or administrator who wishes to employ the applicant is 
required to submit to the Educator Certification Section: 
1. A recommendation requesting issuance of the Substitute License. 
2. The applicant’s current application and documentation of having met all 
requirements. 
(4) Requirements. All requirements must be successfully completed prior to the 
date the application is received in the Educator Certification Section. 
(a) Successful completion of the Alabama Special Requirements in 
Rule 290-3-2-.02(4). 
(b) Verification of a high school diploma or state-issued high school equivalency 
diploma. Required documentation must be kept on file by the superintendent or administrator 
requesting the license.  A certificate of attendance will not meet this requirement. 
(5) Degree Level.  The Substitute License will not be issued at a degree level. 
(6) Valid Period. The valid period of the license shall be from the date of issuance 
through the remainder of the same scholastic year, and thereafter, for the next five consecutive 
scholastic years. The Substitute License may be reissued by following the same procedure 
used in issuing the initial certificate. 
Author: Dr. Thomas R. Bice 
Statutory Authority: Ala. Const. Amend. 284, Ala. Code §§16-3-11, 16-23-1 and 16-23-2 (1975). 
History: Adopted new, 8-4-08, effective 9-18-08; repealed and adopted new, 12-9-10, effective 1-14-11; emergency Rule to 
repeal filed 11-14 -13; repealed and adopted new 1-17-14, effective 2-21-14; repealed and adopted new 3-10-16, effective 
4-24-16. 
Pages 234-240 are RESERVED 
233 