Maine Initial Teacher Certification Standards

Maine has adopted the InTASC Core Teaching Standards to ensure that beginning teachers are
prepared to work effectively with learners and their families and to contribute to the quality of
schools and public education generally. Bowdoin’s Education Department ensures that all students
taking courses in teaching pathway are familiar with these standards. All students completing the
Bowdoin Teacher Scholars certification route will demonstrate and meet these standards.

Our teaching pathways courses include Education 1101, 2203, 3301, 3302, 3303, and 3304.

Education 1101 addresses standards 3 and 9.
Education 2203 addresses standards 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11
Education 3301/3302 address standards 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11
Education 3303/3304 address standards 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11


Standard #1: Learner Development
The teacher understands how learners grow and develop, recognizing that patterns of learning and
development vary individually within and across the cognitive, linguistic, social, emotional, and
physical areas, and designs and implements developmentally appropriate and challenging learning
experiences.

Standard #2: Learning Differences
The teacher uses understanding of individual differences and diverse cultures and communities to
ensure inclusive learning environments that enable each learner to meet high standards.

Standard #3: Learning Environments
The teacher works with others to create environments that support individual and collaborative
learning, and that encourage positive social interaction, active engagement in learning, and self
motivation.

Standard #4: Content Knowledge
The teacher understands the central concepts, tools of inquiry, and structures of the discipline(s) he
or she teaches and creates learning experiences that make these aspects of the discipline accessible
and meaningful for learners to assure mastery of the content.

Standard #5: Application of Content
The teacher understands how to connect concepts and use differing perspectives to engage learners
in critical thinking, creativity, and collaborative problem solving related to authentic local and global
issues.

Standard #6: Assessment
The teacher understands and uses multiple methods of assessment to engage learners in their own
growth, to monitor learner progress, and to guide the teacher’s and learner’s decision making.


                                                                                              Rev. 8/2016 DS
Standard #7: Planning for Instruction
The teacher plans instruction that supports every student in meeting rigorous learning goals by
drawing upon knowledge of content areas, curriculum, cross-disciplinary skills, and pedagogy, as
well as knowledge of learners and the community context.

Standard #8: Instructional Strategies
The teacher understands and uses a variety of instructional strategies to encourage learners to
develop deep understanding of content areas and their connections, and to build skills to apply
knowledge in meaningful ways.

Standard #9: Professional Learning and Ethical Practice
The teacher engages in ongoing professional learning and uses evidence to continually evaluate
his/her practice, particularly the effects of his/her choices and actions on others (learners, families,
other professionals, and the community), and adapts practice to meet the needs of each learner.

Standard #10: Leadership and Collaboration
The teacher seeks appropriate leadership roles and opportunities to take responsibility for student
learning, to collaborate with learners, families, colleagues, other school professionals, and
community members to ensure learner growth, and to advance the profession.

Standard #11: Technology Standards for Teachers
Effective teachers model and apply the National Educational Technology Standards for Students
(NETS•S) as they design, implement, and assess learning experiences to engage students and
improve learning; enrich professional practice; and provide positive models for students, colleagues,
and the community.




                                                                                              Rev. 8/2016 DS
