126CSR114

as a summative performance rating on the West Virginia Educator Evaluation during the last two years of
employment; and 3) have successfully completed a WVBE-approved cooperating teacher course, at no
cost to the teacher, or hold certification through the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards
(NBPTS).

5.13. Cooperating Teacher (Out-of-State). Shall: 1) hold a valid teaching credential beyond the initial
license and in the content area of the candidate placed in the candidate’s classroom and in the state of
the placement; 2) have a minimum of five years of teaching experience or 3-4 years of teaching experience
accompanied by a letter of recommendation from the pre-k-12 building administrator; and 3) provide
evidence of successful performance (such as educator evaluations) during the last two-years of
employment or hold certification through the NBPTS. A cooperating teacher who meets all requirements
except the experience requirement may submit an exception request to the WVDE.

5.14. Cooperating School Counselor. Shall, at a minimum: 1) hold a valid West Virginia five-year
professional student support certificate with a minimum of five years of school counseling experience or
3-4 years of school counseling experience accompanied by a letter of recommendation from the pre-k-12
building administrator; 2) hold Accomplished or higher as a summative performance rating on the West
Virginia Educator Evaluation during the last two years of employment; and 3) have successfully completed
a WVBE-approved cooperating teaching training course, at no cost to the counselor, or must be a Licensed
Professional Counselor issued through the West Virginia Board of Examiners in Counseling.

5.15. Co-teaching. An educational method that involves two teachers working together to plan,
instruct, assess, and reflect on provided instruction for a single group of students allowing for more one-
on-one interaction and differentiated instruction.

5.16. Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation (CAEP). The organization that reviews
and accredits an EPP based on compliance with CAEP national standards related to the functioning of the
EPP. EPPs must have national accreditation or be seeking national accreditation candidacy for its
graduates to be licensed to teach in the public schools of West Virginia.

5.17. Diversity. Demonstrated through the variety of personal experiences, values, and world views
that arise from differences of culture and circumstance as represented within our state and region and
not limited to ethnicity. Each IHE will bring together a full range of backgrounds and perspectives to its
teaching, research, service responsibilities, as well as field and clinical placements.

5.18. Educator Preparation Program (EPP). A college, department, or school of education located in
an accredited IHE and that delivers WVBE-approved programs of study leading to licensure to work in the
public schools of West Virginia.

5.19. Educator Preparation Provider Advisory Committee (EPPAC). Comprised of public school and
higher education teachers and administrators who advise the chief teacher education officer of the EPP
on educator preparation matters. All EPPs offering WVBE-approved EPPs of study leading to licensure to
work in the public schools of West Virginia are required to have an EPPAC.

5.20. Educator Preparation Program Review Board (EPPRB). Makes recommendations to the WVBE
regarding the approval of EPPs and content/specialization programs of study leading to licensure to work
in the public schools of West Virginia.
