126CSR114

months from the date of completing an approved program for licensure is required to satisfy any current
and additional test and program components in effect at the time of application and to comply with
conditions outlined for the validity period.

10.4.c. Tests Required for New Specializations on a Professional Certificate. A candidate who
wishes to add a new specialization to the candidate’s Professional Teaching Certificate by completing an
approved program at an accredited IHE is required to satisfy, in addition to the approved program content
requirements, the content test requirement, if a test is required. It is assumed that a candidate who holds
a Professional Teaching Certificate has previously satisfied requirements in preprofessional skills and
professional education components and that a candidate who holds either the Professional Support or
Professional Administrative Certificate has satisfied the preprofessional skills component. Institutions may
modify this requirement for a candidate seeking an additional specialization based on the candidate’s
work or career experiences. In addition to satisfying the approved program content requirements and
testing requirements for the new content specialization, if available, individuals wishing to add a new
specialization to the Professional Teaching Certificate must also complete a clinical experience which
includes a performance assessment as defined in section 6.7.b. EPPs will determine the method for and
the amount of clinical and/or field-based experiences necessary to satisfy the requirements specified in
section 6.7.b.

10.4.d. Content test requirement as a requirement of program completion: Effective January 1,
2017, candidates shall obtain passing scores on grade-level appropriate, WVBE-adopted Praxis Il content
test(s) as described in the West Virginia Licensure Testing Directory on the WVDE website as a
requirement of program completion.

10.4.e. Content test requirement as a requirement for clinical experience. Effective July 1, 2017,
candidates shall obtain passing scores on grade-level appropriate, WVBE-adopted Praxis || content test(s)
or meet the criteria as described in the West Virginia Licensure Testing Directory in order to enter the
student teaching assignment/clinical experience component of the WVBE-approved program.
Speech-language pathologist candidates are exempt from this requirement and do not need to provide
passing content proficiency scores prior to completing the clinical experience.

§126-114-11. Authorization and Accreditation Requirements.

11.1. Institutional Authorization. A publicly supported EPP must be authorized by its governing board
to offer programs of study leading to West Virginia licensure, evidenced by a letter from the WVHEPC. In
the case of EPPs housed in private IHEs, a letter from the chief executive officer of the entity authorizing
the EPP of study must be provided.

11.2. Institutional Accreditation. An IHE offering WVBE-approved programs of study must hold
regional accreditation as defined in section 5.

11.3. National Accreditation. All EPPs offering programs of study that lead to licensure to work in the
public schools of West Virginia must meet WVBE-approved national accreditor’s eligibility criteria or be in

the WVBE-approved national accreditor’s candidacy process.

11.3.a. Association for Advancing Quality in Educator Preparation (AAQEP). All guidance to be
found in the policy document(s) and AAQEP Guide.

22
