126CSR114

a teacher licensed to teach in the state of the placement and in the content area in which the candidate
is seeking an endorsement, issued by the state’s authorizing agency. Candidates who are completing their
clinical experience as the teacher of record (e.g., CTR, candidates seeking alternative certification or on a
first-class permit) will have professional support team in lieu of a cooperating teacher as described in
W.Va. Code §18A-3C-1. The candidate must be assessed during the clinical experience in all
specializations for which the candidate is requesting licensure during field-based and/or clinical
experiences. Candidates must successfully complete all Praxis || exams prior to entering Residency 2 or
meet approved criteria stated in the West Virginia Licensure and Testing Directory. The IHE is also
required to document the candidates’ field-based and/or clinical experiences with diverse multicultural,
at-risk, and special needs learners at each programmatic level for which they anticipate licensure.
Yearlong clinical experiences completed in a virtual/online environment shall not constitute more than 50
percent of the minimum required experience. Five requirements for the programmatic level coverage for
required field-based experiences exist in the current system.

6.8.c.3.A. Any pre-k-Adult program of study is required to contain clinical experience at
a minimum of one programmatic level. Experience at the elementary, middle, and high school level not
covered during the clinical experience shall be completed by field experience.

6.8.c.3.B. Any K-Adult program of study is required to contain clinical experience at a
minimum of one programmatic level. Experience at the elementary, middle, and high school level not
covered during the clinical experience shall be completed by field experience.

6.8.c.3.C. Any 5-Adult program of study is required to contain clinical experience at a
minimum of one programmatic level. The level not covered during the clinical experience shall be
completed by field experience.

6.8.c.3.D. Any elementary program of study (K-6) is required to contain clinical
experience at a minimum of one programmatic level. The level not covered during the clinical experience
shall be completed by field experience.

6.8.c.3.E. Any 9-Adult program of study is required to contain field-based experiences
and clinical experience at a minimum of one programmatic level.

6.8.c.4. Residents who have not completed their content exam when applying for the
Yearlong Resident Permit will be issued a Short-Term Residency Permit. All content exams must be
successfully completed prior to applying for the Long-Term Residency Permit or meet approved criteria
stated in the West Virginia Licensure and Testing Directory.

6.8.c.4.A. Residents may be permitted to substitute during Residency 2 with county
approval and if the resident meets the following criteria: 1) resident must hold a Long-Term Residency
Permit, 2) substitute days may not exceed one day per week, 3) residents may only substitute in the host
school of their yearlong residency placement, 4) the resident and cooperating teacher should have
advanced notice of the requested day and both be in agreement for the resident to be away from the
assigned classroom for the day, and 5) the Resident 2 student shall be paid a base rate no less than one
who holds a bachelor’s degree.

6.8.c.5. Resident Emails. Each candidate completing an approved yearlong residency clinical
experience, as defined in section 5 for candidates completing their program, shall be assigned a k-12 email

16
