126CSR114

EPPRB, the WVBE may assign Probationary Approval Status to EPPs and/or programs that have been
assigned Probationary Approval Status by their WVBE national accreditor.

12.2.e. In the event of a national accreditation revocation or denial of accreditation of an EPP,
the EPPRB will review the accreditor’s evaluation of the EPP and make a recommendation to the WVBE.

12.3. Review of Programs of Study.

12.3.1. Programs shall seek initial national or state recognition once 10 candidates have
completed the program or when program reports are due for an upcoming WVBE-approved accreditation
visit. Programs must maintain national, or state recognition of all content areas being recommended for
licensure through the processes identified by the national accreditation agencies or through the WV CAPA
process. The failure of any program to obtain national or state recognition may be subject to having the
EPP’s program approval status revoked. The WVBE may choose to grant the program probationary status
for a defined time period while recognition is sought or to terminate the certification authority of the
program. During a period of probation, no new candidates may be admitted to the program, and existing
candidates must be informed of the probationary status of the program. If certification authority is
terminated by the WVBE, no new candidates can be admitted, and the existing candidates have two years
to complete the program. If existing candidates do not complete the program within two years or a
WVBE-approved time period, they must transfer to another WVBE-approved program of study or program
provider or they will not be eligible for licensure. When any EPP is terminated, the IHE shall notify all
current and potential internal candidates of the status of its program.

§126-114-13. Educator Preparation Program Review Board (EPPRB).

13.1. EPPRB Purpose. The WVBE has created the EPPRB to make recommendations to the WVBE
regarding initial and continuing EPP approval.

13.2. EPPRB Composition. The EPPRB shall be comprised of seven voting members selected from a
pool of trained EPP of study assessors/examiners. Three members shall represent higher education with
two representatives appointed by the WVHEPC and one representative appointed by the West Virginia
Independent Colleges and Universities. Three members shall represent public education, grades
pre-k-Adult, appointed by the WVBE. Each year the chairperson of the WVCPTS shall appoint a higher
education representative of the WVCPTS to the EPPRB. The terms of the EPPRB members shall be for
three years. EPPRB members must exempt themselves from deliberations and actions related to the
status of an EPP if employed by that IHE or serving as a team member during the IHE’s program review.
EPPRB members may not be appointed to serve more than two consecutive terms.

13.3. EPPRB Functions. The primary functions of the EPPRB are to review and make
recommendations regarding:

13.3.a. documents submitted by EPPs requesting Initial Status for anew EPP of study that has not
previously been included in any WVBE-approved national accreditation review;

13.3.b. documents related to EPP proposed content specializations that have not previously been
included in the WVBE-approved national accreditation review;

13.3.c. documents submitted by EPPs requesting Approval Status for a Revised Program of Study;

24
