126CSR114

6.3.b. Responsibilities.

6.3.b.1. EPPs shall provide a liaison to work with each partnering county board of education
and school.

6.3.b.2. EPPs shall outline services and assistance they may provide to the partnering county
board of education and school(s).

6.3.b.3. The county board of education or school shall provide access to appropriate
placement sites; access to technology and eligible systems; opportunities related to the instruction of
students including duties and memberships to committees, meetings, and responsibilities allowed by
privacy laws and county relations; and any feasible effort to conduct onsite meetings and/or instruction
of pre-service teachers including, but not limited to, methods courses and co-teaching collaboration that
includes a college supervisor.

6.3.b.4. The county board of education or school shall include EPP faculty and/or staff in
professional learning opportunities that would benefit such faculty and staff to better prepare teachers.

6.3.c. Funding Opportunities. EPPs shall have the opportunity to apply annually for a competitive
grant where funding is contingent upon funds being available. The grant application shall be submitted
to the WVDE following the adopted guidelines and procedures. Awards shall be made yearly for eligible
direct services. Grant proposals must include measurable outcomes and plans for sustainability. Priority
shall be given to sites addressing the WVBE area(s) of focus and priority. An end of the year report must
be submitted to the WVDE at the conclusion of the grant year detailing outcomes and expenses. Unspent
grant monies must be returned to the WVDE at the end of the designated grant year.

6.4. Program Components. All undergraduate and graduate EPPs shall consist of three components:
pre-professional skills, content specialization, and professional education. The three components,
including the associated educational technology knowledge and skills, are necessary to satisfy
WVBE-approved program requirements.

6.4.a. All WVBE-approved programs of study shall include instruction in at least the following:
WVEBE policy and provisions of W. Va. Code governing public education; requirements for federal and state
accountability, including the mandatory reporting of child abuse; federal and state mandated curriculum
and assessment requirements, including diverse multicultural education, trauma-informed and
social-emotional best practices, safe schools, and the student code of conduct; federal and state
regulations for the instruction of exceptional students, as defined by the Individuals with Disabilities
Education Improvement Act of 2004, Public Law 108-446 (IDEA); and varied approaches for effective
instruction for students who are at-risk.

6.5. Pre-professional Skills Component.

6.5.a. Component Description. Pre-professional skills are those basic skills crucial to a teacher’s
performance and effectiveness. Competence in these skills underlies a teacher’s ability to comprehend,
utilize, analyze, synthesize, evaluate, and communicate information. Pre-professional skills common to
educational personnel are reading, writing, mathematics, speaking, listening, and educational technology
and are found in College- and Career-Readiness Standards outlined in the W. Va. 126CSR44AA through
44U series (Policy 2520.1A through 2520.19).
