126CSR114

8.2.f. The prospective CTR shall satisfy the requirements for the CTR Permit as identified in Policy
5202.

8.3. CTR School Counselor Minimum Requirements.

8.3.a. The prospective CTR School Counselor shall: 1) have completed the content preparation
courses with a minimum 3.0 GPA in the area of specialization; 2) have the proficiency score(s) on the state
competency exam(s) in pre-professional skills or qualify for an exemption as described in section 5.5.c;
and 3) have met the proficiency score(s) on the state competency exam(s) in content or qualify for an
exemption as described in Policy 5202 in the area for which the prospective CTR School Counselor is
seeking certification.

8.3.b. The prospective CTR School Counselor shall only be eligible to serve in a school counselor
position in the county which has been posted and for which no other fully certified teacher has been
employed.

8.3.c. The CTR School Counselor Agreement between the IHE and the county board of education
shallinclude the specifics regarding the program of instruction and the responsibilities for supervision and
mentoring by the IHE, the school principal, peer, and mentor counselor.

8.3.d. The salary and benefit costs for the position to which the CTR School Counselor is assigned
shall be used only for program support and to pay the CTR School Counselor a stipend that is no less than
65 percent of all state aid funding. The remaining state aid funds will be split between the IHE and the
school district in accordance with the calculations in the approved budget to support supervision,
mentoring and professional development for the CTR.

8.3.e. The prospective CTR School Counselor shall be in the clinical experience semester and hold
or is eligible to hold a clinical permit.

8.3.f. The prospective CTR School Counselor shall satisfy the requirements for the CTR School
Counselor Permit as identified in Policy 5202.

§126-114-9. Professional Educator Preparation Program (EPP) Requirements: Student Support and
Administration.

9.1. Program Components. All student support and administrative preparation programs shall consist
of three components: pre-professional skills, content specialization, and professional education. The
three components, including the associated educational technology and skills, are necessary to satisfy
WVBE-approved program requirements.

9.2. Pre-professional Skills Component. All provisions of this component described for teaching
specializations (see section 6.5) apply for student support and administrative specializations.

9.3. Content Specialization Component. All provisions of this component described for teaching
specializations (see section 6.6) apply for student support and administrative specializations except in
section 6.6, state-approved content standards and for the public school curriculum pertaining to the
specialization standards.

18
