126CSR114

and

13.3.d. approval of a new EPP that desires to deliver an EPP of study that leads to licensure to
work in the public schools of West Virginia.

13.4. EPPRB Procedures. EPPRB members must exempt themselves from deliberations and actions
related to the status of an EPP if amember is a current employee of that EPP or served as a team member
during the EPP’s national accreditation review. The EPPRB shall meet at least once each semester unless
no materials have been submitted to it for review and recommendation. Any new content specialization
recommended for implementation will be recommended for approval on a timeline consistent with the
EPP’s national accreditation review cycle. If the EPPRB determines and verifies in its written report that
a proposed new program of study or content specialization has serious weaknesses or lacks verification
that the standards have been met, the EPPRB may recommend that the WVBE not grant approval. WVDE
guidelines are developed for procedures for the operation of the EPPRB.

13.5. EPPRB Process for Review and Re-approval of a Revised Program of Study. An EPP may change
up to 25 percent of a teaching certification program’s credit hours from original WVBE-approved program
in either the professional knowledge components or the content specialization courses without WVBE
re-approval. (This applies to adding/dropping courses, not content changes to courses.) If substantive
changes are made or more than 25 percent of a program’s credit hours change from the initial EPPRB
review or last WVBE approval of a revision in either the professional knowledge components or the
content specialization courses, then the EPP must resubmit the proposed changes to the EPPRB for review
and WVBE re-approval.

§126-114-14. Procedures for Initiating a New Content Specialization (Educator Preparation Program
(EPP) of Study).

14.1. Authorization. An EPP currently delivering approved programs of study must obtain approval
from its governing board/body for the implementation of any new program prior to seeking review by the
WVBE. All EPPs participating in the collaborative delivery of a program shall obtain the authorization of
their respective boards/bodies.

14.2. Self-Study. An EPPAC review of the new content specialization/program of study must be
documented.

14.3. EPPRB. The self-study shall be submitted to the EPPRB for review. Upon review of the self-
study, the EPPRB may:

14.3.a. recommend to the WVBE that the program of study be granted Initial Program Approval
status and allow the program to be implemented, with the terms and conditions described in section 5;
or

14.3.b. require additional documentation (written and/or as a result of an on-site review) to
further determine the program’s readiness for implementation; or

14,3.c. require additional program development before the program is recommended for

implementation. The EPP may request technical assistance from the authorized agency as provided in
section 19.

25
