126CSR114

14.3.d. if the program proposal is denied, an EPP may submit a new proposal for review at the
next regularly scheduled EPPRB meeting. The EPP may request technical assistance from the authorized
agency as provided in section 19.

§126-114-15. Procedures for WVBE Approval for a Revised Educator Preparation Program (EPP) of
Study.

15.1. Authorization. An EPP currently delivering approved programs of study must obtain approval
from its governing board/body as defined in section 5 for the implementation of programs of study that
have a significant change from the program of study initially approved by WVBE as defined in section 12.

15.2. Revised Proposal. The EPP must develop a revised proposal that addresses all criteria
established in the WVBE Administrative Guidelines. An EPPAC review of the revised program must be
documented.

15.3. EPPRB. The revised proposal shall be submitted to the EPPRB for review. Upon review of the
revised proposal, the EPPRB may:

15.3.a. recommend to the WVBE that the revised program of study be granted Approval for a
Revised EPP of Study and allow the program to be implemented with the terms and conditions described
in section 5; or

15.3.b. require additional documentation (written and/or as a result of an on-site review) to
further determine the program’s readiness for implementation; or

15.3.c. require additional program development before the revised program is recommended for
implementation. The EPP may request technical assistance from the authorized agency as provided in
section 19.

15.3.d. if the revised proposal is denied, an EPP may submit revisions to the proposal for review
at the next regularly scheduled EPPRB meeting. The EPP may request technical assistance from the
authorized agency as provided in section 19.

§126-114-16. Procedures for WVBE Approval of a New Educator Preparation Program (EPP) Provider
Not Currently Approved to Offer Educator Preparation Programs (EPPs) of Study Leading to Licensure.

16.1. Authorization. An EPP not currently delivering approved programs of study and that meets a
WVBE-approved national accreditor’s eligibility criteria and is in the WVBE-approved candidacy process
must obtain approval from its governing board/body as defined in section 5 prior to seeking review and
approval by the WVBE. All EPPs participating in the collaborative delivery of a program shall obtain the
authorization of their respective boards/bodies.

16.2. Proposal. The EPP must develop a proposal that addresses all criteria established by its
WVBE-approved national accreditor and WVBE.

16.3. Educator Preparation Program Review Board (EPPRB). The proposal shall be submitted to the
EPPRB for review. Upon review of the proposal, the EPPRB will make a recommendation to the WVBE

26
