126CSR114

10.1.1. An executive summary, including supporting appendices of all EPPAC meetings, shall be
included in the EPP’s annual report.

10.2. Second Field/Programmatic Level Requirements. An EPP may offer specializations at single or
multiple programmatic levels as found in Policy 5202, Appendix A. However, the IHE may establish a
policy related to the number of programmatic levels and specializations required for a candidate to satisfy
an approved program and recommendation for licensure except for specializations identified in section
9.3.

10.3. Specialization Prerequisites and Restrictions.

10.3.a. Reading Education. Reading education must be taken in combination with a general
education specialization leading to an endorsement on a Professional Teaching Certificate. The reading
education endorsement shall reflect those grade levels that appear on an individual’s Professional
Teaching Certificate as they relate to the general education endorsement(s).

10.3.b. Special Education. Effective July 1, 2016, individuals who were admitted to EPPs in
autism, emotional disturbance (excluding autism), intellectual disabilities (mild/moderate),
multi-categorical, and specific learning disabilities and who held, qualified for, or were simultaneously
completing a specialization in biology, chemistry, early childhood, elementary education, English, general
science, mathematics, physics, and/or social studies, may be recommended for licensure at which time
they have met to the satisfaction of the IHE’s content requirements of the WVBE-approved program.

10.3.b.1. Additional Endorsement in Autism. Individuals who hold a Professional Teaching
Certificate endorsed in Emotional Disturbance, Multi-Categorical Special Education, Intellectual
Disabilities (Mild/Moderate), Severe Disabilities, or Pre-School Special Needs or the equivalent to these
endorsements as previously defined in this policy may receive an additional endorsement in Autism
provided they make application and successfully complete six semester hours of coursework in Autism
from a regionally accredited IHE.

10.3.b.1.A. Autism Field Experience. At least one and one-half credit hours of the six

required semester hours of coursework must be comprised of field-based experiences or applicant must

provide written verification of a minimum of 30 hours of field-based experiences serving students with
Autism.

10.4. Program Requirements, Assessments, and Test Scores.
10.4.a. Validity of Test Scores.

10.4.a.1. The licensure tests and passing scores required by the WVBE as set forth in this

policy shall remain valid for 12 months after completion of an approved program for licensure (as stated

in Policy 5202, section 4.71.a) where the applicant was continuously enrolled even if the test and or score

required by this policy has changed.

10.4.a.2. A candidate whose test and/or scores do not meet current testing requirements at
the time of application for licensure is required to satisfy current tests and passing scores.

10.4.b. Failure to Apply for Licensure. A candidate who fails to apply for licensure within 12

21
