126CSR114

course in mathematics strategies for exceptional learners and a course in college-level mathematics. The
foundation of knowledge in literacy and mathematics instruction must be sufficient for collaborating with
regular education classroom teachers, teaching, or co-teaching academic subject matter content of the
general curriculum to individuals with exceptional learning needs across a wide range of performance
levels, and designing appropriate learning and performance accommodations and modifications for
individuals with exceptionalities in academic subject matter content of the general curriculum.

6.6.6.5. Within all WVBE-approved programs, IHEs should seek to hire full-time faculty who
have a minimum of one degree higher than the degree level at which they are teaching. Faculty shall have
a degree(s) and/or professional licensure and/or expertise in the area(s) in which they are teaching.

6.6.c. Mathematics Content in Teacher Preparation.
6.6.c.1. Each elementary (K-6) teacher preparation program must contain:

6.6.c.1.A. three semester credit hours of college algebra or verification of college algebra
equivalency and a minimum of six hours of college-level mathematics courses that meet WVBE
requirements for the discipline, and

6.6.c.1.B. a three-hour course in mathematics methods.
6.6.c.2. Each middle childhood (5-9) mathematics teacher preparation program must contain:

6.6.c.2.A. a course in college algebra or verification of college algebra equivalency and a
minimum of 18 hours of college-level mathematics courses that meet WVBE requirements for the
discipline, and

6.6.¢.2.B. a three-hour course in mathematics methods.
6.6.d. Reading Content in Teacher Preparation.

6.6.d.1. Each elementary education EPP must contain a minimum of nine credit hours of
reading, which includes a focus on the five essential components of reading (i.e., phonemic awareness,
phonics, fluency, vocabulary, and comprehension), methods for teaching writing to reinforce reading and
language acquisition, as well as how to effectively use data to assess students’ reading ability, use that
assessment information for reteaching, remediation, and/or enrichment as appropriate for individual
students, and how to identify and correct reading difficulties.

6.6.d.2. Each middle and secondary (Pre-k-Adult, 5-Adult, 9-Adult) preparation program must
contain a minimum of three hours of reading in the content area which include a focus on vocabulary,
comprehension, and writing as well as how to effectively use data to assess students’ reading abilities in
the content area, use that assessment information for reteaching, remediation, supplementary supports
and/or enrichment as appropriate for individual students.

6.6.e. Special Education Content in Teacher Preparation.

6.6.2.1. All general programs of study must contain a minimum of six hours of preparation in
special education, including a focus on the impact of disability on academic, behavior, and

11
