126CSR114

changed, the validity period for the previously listed tests and/or score shall be one-year from the
effective date of the new test and/or score. Exception: tests and/or scores shall remain valid for 12
months after completion of an approved program for licensure where the applicant was continuously
enrolled even if the test and/or score has changed.

5.40. Yearlong Resident Clinical. A full academic year, two consecutive semesters, spent in a pre-k-12
school, partnering with an experienced cooperating teacher to develop the professional dispositions of
effective teaching. Over the course of the year, teacher residents transition from a collaborative,
co-teaching role into the lead-teaching role receiving targeted support and feedback designed to prepare
novice teachers to be successful upon entering the classroom.

§126-114-6. Professional Educator Preparation Program (EPP) Requirements: Teacher Clinical
Partnerships.

6.1. Partnership. All approved EPPs, public and private, shall have partnership agreements with a
county board of education to collaborate and promote the development of knowledge, skills, and
professional dispositions of their pre-service teachers necessary to demonstrate positive impact on all
pre-k-12 students’ learning. The partnership shall be premised in building a vehicle for improving
educator preparation, teacher professional learning, and teacher quality across West Virginia.

6.2. Focus. The focus partnership shall be on a strengthening relations and mutually beneficial
collaboration between higher education and pre-k-12 schools including community and workforce for
clinical preparation that share responsibility for steady improvement of education preparation to support
continuous enhancement of teacher quality.

6.3. Agreements.

6.3.a. Components. Agreements must delineate roles, responsibilities, and outcomes for each
partner. Agreements shall be designed to promote clinical experience of sufficient depth, breadth,
diversity, coherence, and duration to ensure that pre-service teachers demonstrate their developing
effectiveness and positive impact on all students’ learning and development. Clinical experiences are
structured to have multiple performance-based assessments at key points within the approved program
to demonstrate candidate’s development of the knowledge, skills, and professional dispositions that are
associated with a positive impact on the learning and development of all pre-k-12 students. EPPs work
with all partners to ensure partnership agreements include:

6.3.a.1. written agreement between all partners filed with the WVDE;
6.3.a.2. defined roles and responsibilities for all partners;
6.3.a.3. duration of clinical experiences at all levels;

6.3.a.4. professional learning activities for the EPP and school(s) included in the
partnership(s); and

6.3.a.5. formalized periodic evaluation of the partnership including evaluation of shared
accountability, scheduled planning and ongoing feedback between the EPP, school, and county
leadership.
