126CSR114

6.5.b. Teacher’s Assessment and Proficiency Levels. Prior to a candidate’s admission to a
WVBE-approved EPP, the provider must verify the quality of the admitted candidate. The provider must
demonstrate that the standard for high academic achievement and ability is met through multiple
evaluations and sources of evidence. The teacher candidate must attain the required levels of proficiency
in reading, writing, mathematics, speaking, listening, and educational technology as measured by the
assessments indicated in this policy, including the CASE, as well as assessments and/or levels established
by individual institutions.

6.5.b.1. The cohort must attain a group average minimum GPA requirement of 3.0 in the core
subjects and using a 4-point scale with A=4, B=3, C=2, and D=1.

6.5.6.2. The EPP shall establish the assessments and acceptable levels for the speaking,
listening, and educational technology skills.

6.5.b.3. The EPP will include as part of its admission criteria candidates’ successful completion
of a disposition screening assessment chosen by the EPP.

6.6. Content Specialization Component.

6.6.a. Component Description. Content specialization pertains to the specific teaching,
administrative, or student support specialization(s) listed on a professional license in accordance with
W. Va. Code §18A-3-1. See the West Virginia Licensure Testing Directory on the WVDE website for specific
guidelines related to each specialization with the potential for approved program status. WVBE-approved
specializations and grade level patterns are found in Policy 5202, Appendix A. The content specialization
program standards shall include:

6.6.4.1. WVBE-recognized national content specialization standards for the public school
curriculum pertaining to the specialization;

6.6.a.2. WVBE policies or legislative initiatives that have implications for the teaching
specialization;

6.6.a.3. state-approved content standards for the public school curriculum pertaining to the
specialization standards;

6.6.a.4. content description(s) for the Praxis Il tests identified for the specialization in West
Virginia licensure requirements;

6.6.a.5. institutionally identified content standards;

6.6.a.6. preparation standards promulgated by national professional associations for specific
specializations and WVBE-approved national accreditors (if applicable); and

6.6.a.7. educational technology skills and knowledge related to specializations offered by the
IHE. See International Society for Technology and Education (ISTE) Teaching Standards referenced under

the Resources for Policy 5100 tab found on the WVDE Office of Educator Preparation web page.

6.6.b. Standards for Subject-area Content in EPP.
