126CSR114

address by the county for the duration of the residency to allow for the full immersion of the student
resident into the school environment.

§126-114-7. Alternative Preparation Program Requirements.

7.1. General Requirements. In accordance with W. Va. Code §18A-3-1d(a)(1) the WVBE promulgates
separate procedures for alternative programs for classroom teachers, alternative programs for highly
qualified special education teachers, and additional alternative programs to prepare highly qualified
special education teachers. These procedures are separate from the WVBE’s other procedures for
approving standard teacher education programs. Therefore, alternative preparation programs of W. Va.
Code §§18A-3-1a through 18A-3-1j must meet the criteria specified in Policy 5901.

7.2. WVBE approval procedures for officially recognizing pedagogical standards and programs
pursuant to W. Va. Code §18A-3-2a(a}(1)(C) are separate from the WVBE’s procedures for approving
standard teacher education programs. Therefore, programs pursuant to W. Va. Code §18A-3-2a(a)(1)(C)
must meet criteria specified in Policy 5901.

§126-114-8. Clinical Teacher of Record (CTR).

8.1. Provisions. An IHE with a WVBE-approved EPP in the state may enter into an agreement with a
county board of education to establish a CTR program.

8.2. CTR Minimum Requirements.

8.2.a. The prospective CTRs shall: 1) have completed the content preparation courses with a
minimum 3.0 GPA in the area of specialization; 2) have the proficiency score(s) on the state competency
exam(s) in pre-professional skills or qualify for an exemption as described in section 5.5.c; and 3) have
met the proficiency score(s) on the state competency exam(s) in content or qualify for an exemption as
described in Policy 5202 in the area for which the prospective CTR is seeking certification.

8.2.b. The prospective CTRs shall only be eligible to serve as the teacher of record in a teaching
position in the county which has been posted and for which no other fully certified teacher has been
employed.

8.2.c. The agreement between the IHE and the county board of education shall include the
specifics regarding the program of instruction and the responsibilities for supervision and mentoring by
the IHE, the school principal, peer, and mentor teachers.

8.2.d. The salary and benefit costs for the position to which the CTR is assigned shall be used only
for program support and to pay the CTR a stipend that is no less than 65 percent of all state aid funding.
The remaining state aid funds will be split between the IHE and the school district in accordance with the
calculations in the approved budget to support supervision, mentoring and professional development for
the CTR.

8.2.e. The prospective CTR shall be either in the student teaching semester and hold or is eligible

to hold a student teaching permit or be in Residency 2 and hold or is eligible to hold a Long-Term Resident
Permit.

17
