126CSR114

6.6.b.1. Elementary Education (K-6) Programs. Elementary education programs shall include
a minimum of 30 credit hours of coursework in English language arts (including speaking, listening, writing,
and reading utilizing the WVDE adopted approaches), health, mathematics, physical education, science,
social studies, and the arts such that the coursework is relevant to the curriculum delivered in the
elementary classroom and meets all requirements for all curriculum as defined by the WVBE.

6.6.6.2. Middle Level (5-9) Programs. Individuals choosing to complete two middle level
programs shall complete the minimum of a subject-area minor in each subject and meet all requirements
for all curriculum as defined by the WVBE.

6.6.b.3. Secondary Level Programs.

6.6.b.3.A. Each college or university with secondary-level teacher preparation programs
resulting in 5-adult or 9-adult licensure require credit hours in the content areas.

6.6.b.3.B. Each secondary-level teacher preparation program that results in 5-adult or
9-adult licensure must meet the minimum requirements referenced in W. Va. 123CSR133, Series 11,
Standards and Processes for Approval of New Academic Programs, and complete content coursework of
no less than 36 hours and no more than 42 hours.

6.6.b.3.C. Each college or university with secondary-level teacher preparation programs
resulting in 5-adult or 9-adult licensure must include some form of culminating educational experience
that implements content into practice.

6.6.b,3.D. All content coursework in the secondary-level teacher preparation program
must meet competencies required for licensure and its related P-12 standards.

6.6.b.4. Special Education Programs. All special education programs, including gifted, shall
align to the Council for Exceptional Children preparation standards and address the six pillars of the IDEA:
development, implementation, and evaluation of an Individualized Education Program (IEP), Free
Appropriate Public Education (FAPE) guidelines, understanding and applying the concept of Least
Restrictive Environment (LRE), Appropriate Evaluation requirements and techniques, Parent and Teacher
Participation, and Procedural Safeguards.

6.6.b.4.A. Programs must include methods of designing specially designed instruction and
appropriate learning and performance accommodations and modifications for individuals with
exceptionalities in academic subject area content of the general curriculum to meet grade-level standards
or alternate academic grade level standards.

6.6.b.4.A.1. A required minimum of 30 credit hours of coursework must include nine
credit hours of reading or literacy instruction appropriate to each student’s age and individual learning
needs. Content will focus on the essential components of reading (i.e., phonemic awareness, phonics,
fluency, vocabulary, comprehension for elementary endorsements and fluency, vocabulary, and
comprehension for 5-Adult endorsements) as well as how to assess students’ reading or literacy ability,
use that assessment information for reteaching, remediation, and/or enrichment as appropriate for
individual students, and how to identify and correct reading difficulties for all grade levels.

6.6.b.4.A.2. All programs must include six credit hours in mathematics, including a

10
