126CSR114

11.3.b. Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation (CAEP). All guidance to be found in
the CAEP policy document(s) and CAEP Handbook.

11.4. Content Specialization Approval. All content specializations and endorsements offered by an EPP
that lead to licensure shall be recognized by the appropriate national standards board (i.e., NCTE, CEC,
NCTM, NELP) or programs leading to initial licensure may be approved by the WV CAPA.

§126-114-12. Education Preparation Program (EPP) Approval.

12.1. Granting of Approved Program Status. The WVBE is the statutory body with the authority to
recognize EPPs leading to the licensure of teachers to serve in the public schools of West Virginia. The
EPPRB will recommend approval status to the WVBE consistent with sections 14 and 15.

12.2. Initial Program Provider Approval.

12.2.a. Request for Institutional Approval. An IHE that does not currently offer WVBE-approved
programs and that meets eligibility criteria to become a WVBE-approved national accreditor’s candidate
may notify the WVBE of its desire to become an EPP provider and offer programs of study leading to
licensure of teachers to serve in the public schools of West Virginia. This notification must be submitted
in writing to the WVBE as least one year prior to the anticipated implementation date of the proposed
program(s).

12.2.b. Prerequisite Requirements. Effective July 1, 2016, an IHE seeking approval to offer a
WVBE-approved EPPs must meet authorization and accreditation requirements indicated in section 12
prior to the review of the proposed program.

12.2.c. Proposal. Proposal and program approval procedures and requirements for a new EPP
are described in administrative guidelines available from the WVBE.

12.2.d. EPP Approval Status. The WVBE may grant Initial Approval Status to new programs of
study prior to their inclusion in the EPP’s accreditation review. Also, the WVBE, upon recommendation of
EPPRB, may classify the status of EPPs and additional programs as follows: Initial Approval Status,
Continuing Approval Status, and Probationary Approval Status.

12.2.d.1. Initial Approval Status. Following a review and recommendation by the EPPRB, the
WVBE may grant initial approval to a new EPP and/or new program of study that has not previously been
included in the EPP’s accreditation review or that have not previously been offered by the EPP. Initial
Approval Status may be granted by the WVBE for a period of five years. The EPP will be required to
document in its annual report that the progress it is making ensures the success of its graduates to
promote student achievement in the public schools in the IHE’s service region. During the Initial Approval
Status stage, the EPP may recommend graduates for West Virginia certification.

12.2.d.2. Continuing Approval Status. Following a review and recommendation by the EPPRB,
the WVBE may grant Continuing Approval Status to those EPPs and/or program that have received Full
Accreditation. To maintain Continuing Approval Status programs with the WVBE, EPPs must undergo the
accreditation review and receive regular approval according to the accreditor’s guidelines.

12.2.d.3. Probationary Approval Status. Following a review and recommendation by the

23
