126CSR114

§126-114-4. Authority of the WVBE.

4.1. All programs of study that result in licensure to work in the public schools of West Virginia require
the approval of the WVBE. This approval requirement applies to new and continuing programs of study
and to any IHE seeking initial approval to offer new programs.

4.2. The WVBE shall adopt standards and procedures for the approval of programs of study that
enable prospective teachers who satisfactorily complete such programs and licensure requirements to be
licensed in West Virginia.

4.3. The WVBE establishes the WVCPTS to serve as its advisory body on matters related to the
preparation of educational personnel. The WVBE shall establish regular communications with the
WVCPTS and may solicit its recommendations prior to taking official action on educator preparation
policies. [See W. Va. 126CSR154, Policy 5050, West Virginia Commission for Professional Teaching
Standards].

4.4. The WVBE acknowledges that the governing boards of public IHEs and the appropriate governing
body of a private IHE may establish additional standards and accreditation requirements and procedures
regarding EPPs. The WVBE pledges its cooperation with the governing boards or bodies and the
institutions under their control in establishing jointly agreed upon programs of study review procedures
pursuant to section 12 that emphasize cooperation, minimize duplication, and specify the process and
materials to be covered in the review.

§126-114-5. Definitions.

5.1. Accredited Institution of Higher Education (IHE). A college or university accredited: by one of
the regional accrediting agencies to award degrees at a stipulated level, i.e., bachelor’s degree, master’s
degree, and/or doctorate and recognized by the Council for Higher Education Accreditation (CHEA), by
one of the National Faith-Related Accrediting Organizations recognized by CHEA and the United States
Department of Education (ED), or by the Accrediting Council for Independent Colleges and Schools.

5.2. Admission to an Approved Program. The filing of an application by a prospective teacher
declaring the prospective teacher as a candidate to complete an approved EPP and the institution’s formal
acceptance of the student based on the prospective teacher satisfying the admission criteria. The criteria
for full program admission are: 1) minimum of 2.5 individual grade point average (GPA) calculated using
institutional policy; 2) successful completion of a disposition screening assessment chosen by the EPP; and
3) the required performance as per the West Virginia Licensure Testing Directory on the WVDE website
on the Core Academic Skills for Educators (CASE), as well as any other institutionally established
performance assessments in speaking, listening, and educational technology.

5.3. Alternative EPP. A WVBE-approved program for teacher education that is offered as an
alternative to the standard college or university programs for the education of teachers and provides an
alternative means for a qualified person to earn a provisional professional teaching certificate, as
described in W. Va. Code §§18A-3-1a through 18A-3-1j and W. Va. 126CSR161, Policy 5901, Regulations
for Alternative Certification Programs for the Education of Teachers (Policy 5901).

5.4. Alternative EPP Provider. A \WVBE-approved program for teacher education that is offered as an
alternative to the standard college or university programs for the education of teachers provided by
