126CSR114

entities as identified within W. Va. Code §18A-3-1a through §18A-3-1j and Policy 5901.

5.5. Association for Advancing Quality in Educator Preparation (AAQEP). A national organization that
reviews and accredits an EPP based on a peer review with a holistic approach to meeting national
standards related to the functioning of the EPP. EPPs must have national accreditation or be seeking
candidacy for its graduates to be licensed to teach in West Virginia.

5.6. Authorized Agency. The state agency designated by the WVBE to administer EPP approval
standards and procedures approved by the WVBE. Currently, the WVDE serves as the WVBE’s authorized
agency.

5.7. Career Technical Education (CTE) Preparation Programs of Study. A WVBE-approved EPP of study
delivered by an EPP provider located in an IHE that holds accreditation as defined in section 5.1, based
upon WVDE-adopted CTE program objectives and other requirements, and which has been approved by
the WVBE.

5.8. Clinical Teacher of Record (CTR). A program involving a partnership between a county board of
education and an IHE so that the pre-service teacher or pre-service school counselor, during the last
semester of the clinical experience, is hired by a county to fill a vacant position that has been posted for
which no other fully certified professional has been employed. The CTR is the teacher of record who will
receive no less than 65 percent of the state aid formula. CTR programs require authorization of the WVBE
pursuant to W. Va. Code §18A-3-1(e).

5.9. Cohort. A group of education candidates admitted to an EPP of study at the same time, e.g., a
class entering in a fall semester.

5.10. Cohort GPA. The GPA averaged for all members of a cohort or class of admitted candidates.
Averaging does not require that every candidate meet the specified GPA.

5.11. Collaborative Program. An approved EPP that is delivered as the result of a formal written
agreement between two or more WVBE-approved EPP providers to enable prospective teachers to
receive licensure in a content specialization that is not available at the home |HE and that is approved for
the cooperating IHE.

5.12. Cooperating Teacher (For Resident or Student Teacher). An experienced and effective teacher
engaged in the purpose of affirming to a beginning teacher the potential for professional growth through
continuous improvement. The cooperating teacher is proficient when interacting in different
interpersonal contexts and is adept in both mentoring and coaching the beginning teacher in a genuine
manner that engenders trust. The cooperating teacher is willing to provide instructional support and
coach beginning teachers to improve skill and performance no matter what level beginning teachers are
performing. Instructional coaching by cooperating teachers is structured around fulfilling standards and
performance targets and consists of discussions where the cooperating teachers provides objective
feedback on the beginning teacher’s strengths and weaknesses as aligned to both the content standards
and West Virginia Professional Teaching Standards.

5.12.a. Effective July 1, 2018, cooperating teachers for clinical experience shall, at a minimum:
1) hold a valid West Virginia five-year teaching credential in the content area of the candidate placed in
their classrooms with a minimum of three years of teaching experience; 2) hold Accomplished or higher
