126CSR114

6.7. Professional Education Component.

6.7.a. Component Description. Professional Education includes the studies and experiences that
prepare the prospective teacher to integrate professional pedagogy, content knowledge, and pedagogical
content knowledge into successful learning experiences for students. Each IHE is required to develop a
mission statement with specific goals that align with a WVBE-approved national accreditor’s standards
and the West Virginia Professional Teaching Standards. The mission statement shall include a description
of the IHE’s focus on data-driven decision-making, continuous improvement, and a snapshot of its
prospective professional teachers. The statement will serve as the foundation on which the IHE will base
its curriculum and implement the clinical experiences for professional teachers, school administrators,
and student support personnel.

6.7.b. Teacher’s Assessment and Proficiency Levels.

6.7.6.1. Educational Technology Proficiency Levels. The IHE shall, with the cooperating public
school(s), collaboratively establish the assessments and acceptable performance levels for the
educational technology skills (see ISTE Standards referenced under the Resources for Policy 5100 tab
found on the WVDE Office of Educator Preparation web page) associated with the professional education
component.

6.7.b.2. Clinical Experience Performance Assessment Instruments. Candidates completing a
teacher education program recommended by the EPPRB and approved by the WVBE for any initial
professional educator license shall pass an EPP-adopted performance assessment that is also approved
by the WVBE. All institutions must adopt a WVBE-approved TPA, with robust reliability and validity
evidence that supports the intended interpretations and uses of the assessment results, for initial
licensure by September 1, 2024. Before a TPA can be approved for use, each assessment developer must
submit documentation of the instrument for review of technical quality and soundness to the WVDE. The
WVDE review framework for the technical review process shall be aligned with industry-wide accepted
practices and national accreditor guidelines for reliability and validity evidence. The evidence categories
analyzed shall include, but not be limited to, supports for the assessment system, assessment system
operations, the evidential aspect of validity, process-oriented technical quality, and achievement
standards reporting.

6.7.b.2.A. Effective July 1, 2017, all newly admitted candidates into an EPP shall meet the
adopted cut scores for program completion as reflected in the Licensure Testing Directory.

6.7.6.3. Field-based Experiences. All teacher candidates completing a WVBE-approved EPP
for initial teacher licensure must complete a minimum of 125 clock hours of field experience under the
direction of a teacher licensed to teach in the state, by the state’s authorized agency, or their university
supervisor in which the field experience is occurring, in each area in which they are seeking an
endorsement. No less than 85 clock hours of the required 125 shall be completed ina public school. Field
experiences in a virtual/online environment shall not constitute more than 50 percent of the minimum
required experience.

6.7.6.4. Field-based Experiences for Special Education. All teacher candidates completing a
stand-alone special education program, must meet the field based requirements outlined in 6.7.b.3. and
include instructional and behavioral support for students in each of the areas of emotional disorders,
intellectual disabilities, developmental delay, and specific learning disabilities.

13
