126CSR114

9.3.a. Instructional Technology Content in Student Support and Administrator Preparation. All
student support and administrator preparation programs must contain a minimum of three semester
hours of preparation, stand alone or embedded, in instructional technology which incorporate the
standards.

9.4. Professional Education Component.

9.4.a, Component Description. The professional education component for student support
services and administrative programs prepares the candidate to integrate the professional pedagogy and
the specialization knowledge and skills in an educational setting for the delivery of effective student
support services programs or effective leadership roles.

9.4.b. Component Assessment. The component shall be assessed as part of the program review
process.

9.4.b.1. Performance assessment instruments and procedures shall be developed at the
institutional level or adopted as specified in section 6.7 and procedures for their administration shall be
based on the professional education standards and those performance indicators that are implied in the
content specialization standards.

9.4.b.2. The acceptable proficiency level on the professional performance assessment shall be
established collaboratively by public school administrators, student support personnel or administrators,
and teacher education faculty or an adopted TPA instrument; the proficiency level and/or cut score must
be set at or above the national average adopted score/proficiency level or instrument-developer
recommended score/proficiency level.

9.4.c. Teacher’s Assessment and Proficiency Levels.

9.4.c.1. Professional Knowledge Assessment and Proficiency Levels. Each candidate
completing a WVBE-approved program shall be assessed using the IHE’s developed or adopted
performance instrument(s) and procedures developed collaboratively with cooperating public school
personnel. A candidate for a student support services specialization is required to complete a
performance assessment in each specialization for which licensure is requested. The specialization will
be the pre-k-Adult programmatic level. The performance assessment must be completed at two
programmatic levels: elementary, and middle or high school level. Experience at the middle and high
school level not covered during the clinical practice shall be completed by field experience.

9.4.c.2. The performance assessments for administrative endorsements shall be
administered by a local team composed of the IHE supervisor and public school cooperating personnel or
their specified designee. When a public school cooperating teacher is not available to administer the
performance assessment, IHE may designate an IHE-based clinical supervisor in lieu of the public school
supervisor. Verification that the candidate has attained the proficiency level shall be determined by both
college supervisor and cooperating public school personnel, except where the IHE-based clinical
supervisor is used under the conditions noted.

§126-114-10. Additional Program Requirements.

10.1. Educator Program Provider Advisory Council (EPPAC). Each EPP that offers a WVBE-approved

19
