126CSR114

5.29. Regionally Accredited Institution of Higher Education (IHE). A college or university accredited
by one of the regional accrediting agencies recognized by the Council for Higher Education Accreditation
(CHEA); or by one of the National Faith-Related Accrediting Organizations recognized by CHEA and the ED;
or by the Accrediting Council for Independent Colleges and Schools to award degrees at a stipulated level,
ie., bachelor’s degree, master’s degree, and/or doctorate.

5.30. Residency. Component of an EPP that provides teacher candidates with both the underlying
theory of effective teaching and a year-long, in-school residency in which they practice and hone their
skills and knowledge alongside an effective cooperating teacher. Unlike other teaching certification
models, residents do not serve as the teacher of record in the classroom.

5.30.a. Residency 1. The first semester of the yearlong clinical experience.

5.30.b. Residency 2. The second semester of the yearlong clinical experience contingent on
successful completion of Residency 1.

5.31. Residency Hub. A school site which hosts two or more residents who receive collaborative
support from the cooperating teacher, pre-k-12 staff, county leadership, and the EPP.

5.32. Resident Teacher. Pre-service teacher enrolled in a residency model teacher preparation
program that culminates in a yearlong residency clinical working with a cooperating teacher. The resident
teacher participates in an intensively supervised and mentored clinical experience and residency program
for prospective teachers that culminates in a yearlong residency clinical that refines their professional
practice skills and helps them gain the teaching experience needed to demonstrate competence as a
prerequisite to certification to teach in the West Virginia public schools.

5.33. Specialization. The specific teaching, administrative, or student support area listed on the
teacher’s license to which an employee may be legally assigned within the public schools.

5.34. Specialized Professional Association (SPA). Recognized by the ED or the Council for Higher
Education. Examples include, but are not limited to, the National Council of Teachers of English (NCTE)
and the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM).

5.35. Step 7d Funds. Public School Support Plan (PSSP) funding step, effective 2019-2020, to support
county-level implementation of comprehensive systems for teacher and leader induction and professional
growth. Step 7d funds are allocated among the county boards of education based on needs identified in
the strategic plans for continuous improvement of schools and school systems.

5.36. Subject Area Major. Minimum of 30 credit hours in a specific content area.
5.37. Subject Area Minor. Minimum of 15 credit hours in a specific content area.

5.38. West Virginia Content Area Program Approval (WV CAPA). State specific approval model that
has been developed for the approval of content-specific EPP degree offerings through IHEs.

5.39. West Virginia Licensure Testing Directory. A listing of all WVBE-required licensure exams for
teacher certification and for completion of WVBE-approved programs leading to West Virginia licensure.
This directory is maintained on the WVDE website. When tests or scores listed in the directory are
