126CSR114

5.21. Endorsement. The specialization(s) and grade levels appearing on any license authorized by the
WVBE which govern the legal assignment within the public schools of West Virginia (W. Va. Code
§18A-3-2).

5.22. EPP of Study. A WVBE-approved EPP of study delivered by an EPP provider located in an
accredited IHE; has been reviewed by the Educator Preparation Programs Review Board (EPPRB) as
required in section 14; and approved by the WVBE and is based upon state-adopted and national program
objective standards that include preprofessional skills, content specialization, and professional education
components. Upon successful completion, candidates will be eligible for a license or certificate recognized
for employment in the public schools of West Virginia.

5.23. Exemptions. Available to candidates who meet the identified criteria as defined in section 6.5.c
or who are admitted to a WVBE-approved, five-year program that will culminate with a conferred master’s
degree.

5.24. Extraordinary Circumstances. Factors which are often external, unanticipated, and beyond
one’s control that normal experience could not foresee or provide for (i.e., unavailability of coursework,
illness/death, hardship).

5.25. Field-based and Clinical Experiences. Field-based experiences as described in section 6.7.b.3
and section 6.7.b.4, organized by EPPs to occur across the preparation program. They provide
opportunities for candidates to apply knowledge, skill, and dispositions in a variety of settings appropriate
to the content and level of each program of study. Both field-based and clinical experiences as described
in section 6.7.b.3-5 are structured to ensure significant opportunities to engage with diverse multicultural,
at-risk, and special needs} learners. Clinical experiences are completed under the direction of the IHE and
cooperating teacher(s). The experiences are arranged by the EPP with the cooperating teachers such that
they have a thorough understanding of the EPP’s expectations for the candidates during the experiences.
During both field-based and clinical experiences, teacher candidates should observe the instruction of
other teachers and gain experience working directly with students (i.e., plan and teach lessons). Clinical
experiences should link theory and coursework to practice and provide candidates with extensive,
scaffolded experiences with increasing responsibilities to further develop their content knowledge and
pedagogical skills in authentic practice. Formative feedback sessions should occur within the clinical
experience as well as evaluative performance assessments that demonstrate and measure the
proficiencies in the professional roles and in the programmatic levels for which candidates are preparing.

5.26. Governing Boards/Bodies. Entities authorizing the delivery of EPP programs of study. Publicly
supported EPPs are governed by the WVHEPC while privately supported EPPs are governed by their
designated entity.

5.27. License. Any or all the documents issued by the State Superintendent of Schools under state
law and regulations of the WVBE that empowers the holder to perform designated services within the
public schools.

5.28. Performance-based Assessment. An assessment of a prospective teacher’s ability to integrate
content, basic professional knowledge, and pedagogical skills in an appropriate educational setting in
which the prospective teacher anticipates licensure. Teacher candidates graduating from West Virginia
EPPs are required to achieve acceptable performance levels on a WVBE-approved teacher performance
assessment (TPA).
