126CSR114

6.7.b.4.A. WVBE-approved EPP of study leading to an endorsement(s) in an area(s) of
special education shall successfully complete the minimum of a significant field experience, which is no
less than 30 hours of the required 125 hours in the area(s) of special education in which they are seeking
an endorsement(s).

6.7.6.5. Student Teaching Clinical Experiences Completed in the Public Schools. Each
candidate completing an approved program shall spend a minimum of 12 weeks in the clinical portion of
the program unless the candidate is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the college supervisor and
the cooperating public school supervisor that the candidate has achieved the proficiency level in less than
the specified time.

6.7.b.5.A. The clinical experience must be completed under the direction of a teacher
licensed to teach in the state of the placement and in the content in which the candidate is seeking an
endorsement, issued by the state’s authorizing agency.

6.7.b.5.A.1. Candidates who are completing their clinical experience on the job (e.g.,
candidates seeking alternative certification or on a first-class permit) might not have a teacher licensed in
the same content, but instead will have a professional support team as described in W. Va. Code
§18A-3C-1.

6.7.b.5.B. The candidate must be assessed during the clinical experience in all
specializations for which the candidate is requesting licensure. The |HE is also required to document the
candidates’ field-based and/or clinical experiences with diverse multicultural, at-risk, and special needs
learners at each programmatic level for which they anticipate licensure.

6.7.b.5.C. Five exceptions to the programmatic level coverage for required field-based
experiences exist in the current system.

6.7.b.5.C.1. Any pre-k-Adult program of study is required to contain clinical practice
at both the elementary and middle or high school levels. Experience at the middle and high school level
not covered during the clinical practice shall be completed by field experience.

6.7.b.5.C.2. Any K-Adult program of study is required to contain clinical practice at
both the elementary and middle or high school levels. Experience at the middle and high school level not
covered during the clinical practice shall be completed by field experience.

6.7.b.5.C.3. Any 5-Adult program of study is required to contain field-based
experiences and clinical practice at a minimum of two different programmatic levels.

6.7.b.5.C.4. Any 9-Adult program of study is required to contain field-based
experiences and clinical practice at a minimum of one programmatic level.

6.7.b.5.C.5. The elementary education specialization (K-6) is also exempt from the
programmatic level coverage for required field-based experiences at each programmatic level for which
the candidate anticipates licensure. Clinical practice placement in two grades, a primary (K-2) and an
intermediate (3-5) grade, from kindergarten and extending through grade six will satisfy the programmatic
level requirement. This exception for elementary education cannot be used to satisfy the requirement
for other specializations that require experiences in grades 5-9. If the candidate combines elementary

14
