126CSR114

about whether the EPP should receive initial approval to offer educational preparation programs of study
that result in licensure to work in the public schools of West Virginia. Upon receiving approval to become
an EPP in West Virginia, the EPP may then submit programs of study to the EPPRB for a recommendation
for Initial Approval Status as defined in section 5.

§126-114-17. Procedures for Initiating and Evaluating a Pilot Program and Initiatives.

17.1, Pilot Programs and Initiatives. An EPP currently offering approved programs of study may seek
approval for a pilot preparation program in a teaching, student support services or administrative area in
a non-traditional manner or where there is no current WVBE-approved specialization leading to West
Virginia licensure provided the proposal contains enough justification to warrant the new specialization.
An EPP may seek approval for pilot initiatives in educator preparation, student support services or
administration that support the successful completion of an approved program that leads to licensure.
The EPP is encouraged to collaborate with the WVDE during the initial planning stage. The EPP must
identify the program/initiative objectives to be used for summative evaluation. All aspects for the review
and approval of an experimental program, other than WVBE adopted program objectives, are the same
as those outlined in section 15. The experimental programs/initiatives must comply with the guidelines
adopted by the WVDE.

17.2. Evaluation Options. An EPP operating approved programs of study may seek approval for a
waiver from component requirements and/or procedures in current policy for evaluation purposes to
determine if the alternative process described in the waiver prepares candidates who perform as
effectively as candidates who have been prepared according to the component requirements in current
policy. Such request must bein writing and submitted to the EPPRB.

17.3. Proposal and Reporting Guidelines. An EPP that seeks approval to offer a pilot program or a
waiver of current policy must submit the proposal using sound research methodology by clearly indicating
the objective of the project, the persons and agencies involved, the duration of the project, the
assessment procedures and timeline, and the project coordinator. The EPP must also agree to prepare
and submit a summary of its findings to the EPPRB, the WVCPTS, and the WVDE.

17.4. Validity Period of Experimental Program. The experimental pilot program may operate for a
maximum of five years. The EPP must present required program data to the WVDE/EPPRB within three
to five years of operating an experimental pilot program. After three-years of operating a pilot program,
an EPP may request initial approval, as defined in section 13, by submitting the summary of the pilot
program data along with a proposal for initial approval status to the EPPRB for review and
recommendation.

§126-114-18. Educator Preparation Program (EPP) Approval Waiver.

18.1. Waivers for new EPPs. EPPs may be granted a waiver by the WVBE based on critical teacher
shortage areas and subject to WVBE-approved national accreditation guidelines.

18.2. Waiver for Programmatic level changes. EPPs with a secondary 5-Adult WVBE-approved
program of study in mathematics or general science may recommend candidates for 5-9 licensure if a
candidate has completed all 5-Adult program requirements, completed a middle school clinical
experience, and obtained a passing score on the 5-9 required Praxis exam.

27
