126CSR114

education with another specialization, the required programmatic level placement for the other
specialization must be satisfied. These required field-based and clinical-based experiences must be of
sufficient duration and quality to enable the candidate to practice and develop skills and complete a
performance assessment.

6.7.b.5.D. Student teachers shall not be permitted to substitute during their clinical
experience unless the candidate is employed as the teacher of record for the duration of that experience.

6.7.b.5.E. As of July 1, 2020, nonpublic clinical placements must be in a WVBE-accredited
school with a West Virginia certified teacher for the entire clinical experience. The nonpublic school must
be accredited as prescribed in W. Va. 126CSR13C, Policy 2330, Nonpublic School Accreditation, and shall
meet the provisions of W. Va. Code that addresses experiences and instruction for candidates in nonpublic
clinical placements regarding WVBE policy and provisions of W. Va. Code governing public education;
requirements for federal and state accountability, including the mandatory reporting of child abuse;
federal and state mandated curriculum and assessment requirements, including diverse multicultural
education, trauma-informed best practices, safe schools and the student code of conduct; federal and
state regulations for the instruction of exceptional students, as defined by the IDEA; and varied
approaches for effective instruction for students who are at-risk. Accredited non-public schools shall meet
all other criteria of public schools for program completion in this rule and licensure requirements per
Policy 5202.

6.8. Yearlong Residency Minimum Requirements.

6.8.a. Effective July 1, 2021, with the freshman cohort, all EPPs with WVBE-approved programs of
study leading to West Virginia educator licensure must begin the transition to a full residency model by
including a minimum of one program with a yearlong residency pathway as the final clinical experience as
defined in section 5 for candidates completing their program. All educator preparation content areas will
transition to The West Virginia Residency Model no later than the Fall of 2024 with incoming freshman
cohorts.

6.8.b. Authorization. The agreement established between an IHE and county board of education
must be approved by the WVBE.

6.8.c. Each candidate shall complete a Residency 1 and Residency 2 clinical experience for two
consecutive semesters in the clinical portion of the program unless the candidate is able to demonstrate
to the satisfaction of the college supervisor and the cooperating public school cooperating teacher that

the candidate has achieved the proficiency level in less than the specified time.

6.8.c.1. During the Residency 1 clinical classroom placement, candidates completing an
approved program shall spend a minimum of 14 weeks/250 hours during the first semester.

6.8.c.1.A. Residency 1 teachers shall not be pulled from their placement to cover an
unsupervised classroom and shall not be permitted to substitute teach during their residency placement.

6.8.c.2. During the Residency 2 clinical classroom placement candidates completing an
approved program shall spend a minimum of 14 weeks/500 hours during the second semester.

6.8.c.3. The yearlong residency clinical experience must be completed under the direction of

15
