126CSR114

EPP of study shall have an EPPAC comprised of representatives from college and university educators,
teacher candidates, public school administrators and classroom teachers, and community
representatives. The WVDE shall appoint a liaison to serve as a member of each institution’s EPPAC. The
liaison to the IHE from the WVDE shall serve in a nonvoting role. EPPAC serves as an advisory body to the
EPP’s chief officer in developing and reviewing all programs and policies for the preparation of educational
personnel with the EPP. The EPPAC shall meet at least once a semester and shall review matters
pertaining to the preparation and licensure of teachers including the following:

10.1.a. new and revised preparation programs;
10.1.b. admission, retention and exit criteria;

10.1.c. pre-professional skills, including trauma-informed and social-emotional best practices,
content specialization, and professional education assessments;

10.1.d. educational technology activities and assessments;

10.1.e. annual testing and supply/demand reports;

10.1.f. WVBE and national program reviews and findings;

10.1.g. WVBE educational preparation and licensure policies and statutes;
10.1.h. recruitment of students;

10.1.i. clinical and field experiences; and

10.1.j.. development and preparation of policies and programs for inclusion in WVBE self-study
materials.

10.1.k. EPP of Study Modifications. Substantive program of study modification (e.g., addition or
deletion of courses, significant changes in course content or clinical experiences) must be submitted to
the EPPAC for review. Following the EPPAC review, the EPP’s administrator for programs of study shall
submit a letter summarizing the nature of changes and new curriculum summary sheet to the WVBE. An
EPP may change up to 25 percent of a teaching certification program’s credit hours in either the
professional knowledge components or the content specialization courses without EPPRB re-approval.
(This applies to adding/dropping courses, not content changes to courses.) If more than 25 percent of a
program’s credit hours change from the initial EPPRB approval or last EPPRB approval of a revision in
either the professional knowledge components or the content specialization courses, then the EPP must
resubmit the proposed changes to the EPPRB for review and re-approval. After its review of proposed
program modifications, the EPPRB will submit its recommendation for acceptance or rejection of the
proposed changes to the WVBE. The WVBE shall acknowledge by letter to the IHE’s administrator for
programs of study the WVBE’s acceptance or rejection of the modification. If accepted, the modification
shall be incorporated into the EPP’s approved program materials on file with the WVDE and with a
WVBE-approved national accreditor. Any changes made to an existing WVBE-approved EPP shall be
included in the |HE’s annual report submitted to the WVBE-approved national accreditor and will
subsequently be reviewed as part of the accreditation review process.

20
