126CSR114

social/emotional development;; the use of progress-monitoring data generated from established tiered
systems of support and other pre-referral interventions to assist with instruction, the responsibilities of
all educators under the IDEA including the implementation of IEPs, and the accommodations and
modifications needed to support the learning of students with disabilities throughout the continuum of
services.

6.6.e.2. All EPPs must address differentiated instruction techniques for diverse learners using
best practices such as: collaborative methods, co-teaching models, formative assessment, Universal
Design for Learning, and Direct Instruction techniques.

6.6.e.3. All special education instruction for teacher candidates must include and designate
focused instruction and practice in co-teaching.

6.6.2.4. All special education instruction for teacher candidates must include explicit
instruction in the characteristics and best practices for instruction of students with dyslexia and
dyscalculia.

6.6.f. Instructional Technology Content in Teacher (ISTE) Preparation. All EPP programs for initial
licensure must contain a minimum of three semester stand-alone or embedded hours of preparation in
instructional technology incorporating the standards identified in the ISTE Standards referenced under
the Resources for Policy 5100 tab found on the WVDE Office of Educator Preparation web page.

6.6.g. Teacher’s Assessment and Proficiency Levels. Candidates for completion of a
WVBE-approved program shall be required to meet WVBE Praxis Il specialty area test score(s) indicated
for the anticipated specialization(s). A listing of current WVBE-required tests and passing scores is found
in the West Virginia Licensure Testing Directory on the WVDE website.

6.6.h. Support for WVBE-required Praxis Assessment Preparation. EPPs shall have provisions for
providing support/remediation for candidates taking any of the WVBE-required Praxis assessments. A
listing of current WVBE-required tests and passing scores is found in the West Virginia Licensure Testing
Directory on the WVDE website.

6.6.1. All programs must include six credit hours in mathematics, including a course in
mathematics strategies for exceptional learners and a course in college-level mathematics. The
foundation of knowledge in literacy and mathematics instruction must be sufficient for collaborating with
regular education classroom teachers, teaching, or co-teaching academic subject matter content of the
general curriculum to individuals with exceptional learning needs across a wide range of performance
levels, and designing appropriate learning and performance accommodations and modifications for
individuals with exceptionalities in academic subject matter content of the general curriculum.

6.6.j. Effective July 1, 2017, all special education programs must include and designate focused
instruction in co-teaching.

6.6.k. Exemptions for Required Content Courses are available for a MAT program if teacher
candidates have: 1) a conferred bachelor’s degree in the same content area that they are seeking
professional licensure, 2) a minimum 3.0 in the specific content area, and 3) successfully completed the
Praxis Il content test for licensure.

12
