A Vision for Teaching,
      Leading, and Learning




                 Core Teaching and
                Leadership Standards
               for Vermont Educators
State of Vermont                                      Agency of Education
219 North Main Street Suite 402
Barre, VT 05641www.education.vermont.gov




June 5, 2018

Dear Colleagues,

Since being revised in June 2013, A Vision for Teaching, Leading, and Learning – Core Teaching and Leadership Standards for
Vermont Educators ˕ɤɯɶɲ ɵɨɩɨɵɵɨɧ ɷɲ ɤɶ ȃTɫɨ Mɲɸɱɷɤɬɱ BɲɲɮȄ˖ ɫɤɶ ɵɨɰɤɬɱɨɧ ɸɱɷɲɸɦɫɨɧˉ The 2013 revision proudly
included the adoption of professional educator standards based on the Interstate Teacher Assessment and Support Consortium
(InTASC) Model Core Teaching Standards (2011) and the 2008 Interstate School Leaders Licensure Consortium (ISLLC) standards.
Both set of standards formed a blueprint for the performances and essential knowledge that every educator should strive
toward to ensure that all preK-12 students are college and career ready.


In November 2016, the VSBPE adopted the updated Leadership Standards based on the Professional Standards for
Educational Leaders 2015 (formally known as ISLLC). These updated ten standards:


        Have a stronger focus on students and student learning to better prepare students for a productive role in the 21st
         century and
        Are interrelated to better promote academic and personal success for students and
        Are for all levels of educational leaders.


Additionally, included in this resource document are the links to two companion documents published by the Council of
Chief State School Officers (CCSSO) and Jobs for the Future (JFF) to be used with the INTASC Teaching Standards and the
PSEL Leadership Standards. Educator Competencies for Personalized, Learner-Centered Teaching (2015) and Leadership
Competencies for Learning-Centered, Personalized Education (2017). These documents focus on personalized learner-centered
systems and teacher and leader competencies that support personalized learner-centered systems.


Lastly, in the spring of 2018, the VSBPE updated the Code of Professional Ethics and Rules of Professional Conduct for Vermont
Educators that was first adopted in 2009. The VSBPE adopted the NASDTEC (National Association of State Directors of
Teacher Education and Certification) Model Code of Ethics for Educators (2015) which is included in this resource document.


Adopting national standards and a national code of ethics is not only informing Vermont educators of national trends in
ɨɧɸɦɤɷɬɲɱˊ ɥɸɷ ɬɱ ɮɨɨɳɬɱɪ ɺɬɷɫ ɷɫɨ VSBPE˜ɶ ɹɬɶɬɲɱ ɲɩ ɷɨɤɦɫɬɱɪˊ ɯɨɤɧɬɱɪˊ ɤɱɧ ɯɨɤɵɱɬɱɪ ɬɱ Vɨɵɰɲɱɷˉ

Sincerely,

Vermont Standards Board of Professional Educators




                                                                0
             Vermont Standards Board for Professional Educators Members

                                                  2017 - 2018


         Donald Tinney, VSBPE Chair                                 Erik Remmers, VSBPE Vice Chair
         Teacher                                                    Principal
         BFA St. Albans                                             Enosburg Falls High School
         Jennifer Fribush, VSBPE Secretary                          Ric Reardon, VSBPE PAC Chair
         Teacher                                                    Director of Education
         Springfield High School                                    Castleton University
         Roberta Baker, VSBPE LC Chair                              Cynthia Cole
         Teacher                                                    Teacher
         North Country Union Jr. High School                        Chittenden South Supervisory Union
         David St. Germain                                          David Younce
         Education Division Chair                                   Superintendent
         College of St. Joseph                                      Mill River Unified Union School District
         Helen Lanthier                                             Jeremy Hill
         Teacher                                                    Teacher
         St. Albans Town Educational Center                         Waitsfield Elementary School
         Thomas Young                                               Amy McMullen
         Teacher                                                    School Board Member
         Waitsfield Elementary School                               Windsor Southeast Supervisory Union
         Wendy Hillmuth
         Public Member




                                          Vermont Agency of Education

                          Heather Bouchey, Acting Secretary of Education

                                      Amy Fowler, Deputy Secretary

                              Debora Price, Director of Educator Quality

This book cover is designed and printed as part of a cooperative project with the Digital Media Art class at the Barre Technical
Center, Vermont. Book cover layout and design by Ratko Jokic, Jillian Pierce, Ethan Tatro, Dylan Philibert, Digital Media Arts
2012, instructor Ric Nudell.




                                                           1
                                     Table of Contents

                 Core Teaching and Leadership Standards for Vermont Educators


Section One:                          Introduction                  ………..…………………………2


Section Two:            Core Teaching Standards for VT Educators    ………..…………………………4


Section Three:         Core Leadership Standards for VT Educators   …………………………………20


                            Code of Professional Ethics and
Section Four:          Rules of Professional Conduct for Vermont    …………………………………36
                                       Educators




                                                  1
                                                            Introduction
Purpose

The purpose of this document is to serve as a resource for educators, leaders, districts,
professional organizations, teacher education programs, and others. As each set of standards
included here emphasizes the skills and knowledge needed for 21st century teaching and
learning, they form the basis for teacher preparation, licensure, and professional learning. A
Vision for Teaching Leading and Learning includes:

      Core Teaching Standards for Vermont Educators
      Core Leadership Standards for Vermont Educators
      Code of Professional Ethics
Alignment

The Core Teaching and Leadership Standards for Vermont educators stem directly from the
Interstate Teacher Assessment and Support Consortium (InTASC) model core standards, from
the national Policy Board for Educational Administration: Professional Standards for
Educational Leaders 2015 (formally known as ISLLC Standards). Adopting national standards,
ɨɱɶɸɵɨɶ ɷɫɤɷ Vɨɵɰɲɱɷ˜ɶ ɶɷɤɱɧɤɵɧɶ ɤɵɨ ɦɲɰɳɤɷɬɥɯɨ ɺɬɷɫ ɷɫɨ Cɲɰɰɲɱ Cɲɵɨ Sɷɤɷɨ Sɷɤɱɧɤɵɧɶ ɩɲɵ
students in mathematics and English language arts, the National Board for Professional
Teaching Standards (NBPTS) accomplished teaching core principles, and the National Council
for Accreditation of Teacher Education (NCATE) accreditation standards. There is also a direct
correlation between the standards and national teacher evaluation workˊ ɬɱɦɯɸɧɬɱɪ Dɤɱɬɨɯɶɲɱ˜ɶ
Framework1 and the Marzano Teacher Evaluation Model2.

The relationship between and among the standards in Vermont is seen in the following graphic.
Pictured here, student standards are the central focus of our work. The Core Teaching
Standards immediately follow as they define how a teacher can best support students in
meeting the Common Core Standards. The Core Leadership Standards function to support
high-quality instruction and by extension student learning. Next, teacher and leader evaluation
guidelines (see Vermont Guidelines for Teacher and Leader Effectiveness) support effective
evaluation systems where educators are provided with the necessary feedback to guide them in
improving their professional practice. Ideally, the standards function in conjunction with
evaluation systems to promote effective professional growth and learning practices that lead to
improved student learning. Ultimately, the standards remain distinct but function together to
create a coherent system organized around the needs of students.




1 Source: The Danielson Group, Correlation of Danielson Framework for Teaching to InTASC Standards, accessed 11/28/12. Website:

http://www.danielsongroup.org/ckeditor/ckfinder/userfiles/files/Danielson%20Framework%20correlation%20with%20InTASC.pdf
2
  Source: Learning Sciences International, The Marzano Causal Teacher Evaluation Model Alignment to INTASC Model Core Teaching Standards,
(2011). Website: http://www.marzanoevaluation.com/files/Marzano_Causal_Model_Alignment_to_InTASC_Teaching_Standards.pdf



                                                                    2
                 EDUCATION STANDARDS FOR VERMONT


                             Teacher & Leader                 • for school &
                           Evaluation Guidelines                district leaders

                               Core Leadership                • for school &
                                 Standards                      district leaders

                                Core Teaching
                                                              • for teachers
                                 Standards

                                Core Learning
                                                              • for students
                                 Standards




How to Use this Book

This book has been divided into sections devoted to the teaching and leadership
standards. Each section includes an introduction as well as the detailed standards
themselves.




                                           3
Supporting Effective
Teaching in Vermont
Core Teaching Standards for Vermont Educators




                                   4
INTRODUCTION
                                                                                 These standards form the
The dedication and professionalism of Vermont educators make our                 foundation of a system of
schools strong. This is especially important given the research that finds       support for educators by
that teachers are the most important school-based factor affecting student       outlining what educators
achievement (Hanushek, Eric A., John F. Kain, and Steven G. Rivkin.                across all content and
                                                                                 grade levels should know
1998). The increasing attention to teaching effectiveness, however,
                                                                                   and be able to do to be
necessitates that we create a coherent system of support so that educators
                                                                                effective in today's schools.
can continue to achieve at a high level.

In 2011, the Vermont Standards Board for Professional Educators (VSBPE) adopted the Interstate
Teacher Assessment and Support Consortium (InTASC) Model Core Teaching Standards. These
standards form the foundation of such a system by outlining what educators across all content
and grade levels should know and be able to do to be effective in today's schools. The Vermont
Cɲɵɨ Tɨɤɦɫɬɱɪ Sɷɤɱɧɤɵɧɶ ˕ɨˉɪˉ IɱTASC˖ ɨɰɥɲɧɼ ɷɫɨ VSBPE˜ɶ ɹɬɶɬɲɱ ɩɲɵ ɫɤɹɬɱɪ ɤ ɦɤɵɬɱɪˊ
competent, highly effective educator in every Vermont classroom. Education professionals from
across the country, including practicing teachers, teacher educators and state education agency
staff, drafted these research-based standards. The ten standards call for:

    Personalized Learning for Diverse Learners
    A Stronger Focus on Application of Knowledge and Skills
    Improved Assessment Literacy
    A Collaborative Professional Culture
    New Leadership Roles for Teachers and Administrators
The revised standards are compatible with the Common Core State Standards for math and
English language arts, with the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards (NBPTS),
and Learning Forward professional development standards.

In August of 2015, the Council of Chief State School Officers (CCSSO)
and Jobs for the Future (JFF) collaborated and published Educator            The Educator Competencies
Competencies for Personalized, Learner-Centered Teaching. The                for Personalized, Learner
                                                                             Centered Teaching build on
competencies were designed to assist educators with personalized,            and push beyond the best
learner-centered environments to prepare students for success in             existing teaching
postsecondary education and careers. They may be used in                     competencies and standards to
                                                                             capture what educators need
conjunction with the Core Teaching Standards and a crosswalk                 in order to create and thrive in
between the InTASC Standards and the Educator Competencies may               personalized learner-centered
also be found in this document.                                              systems.

                                                                             Jobs for the Future& the council of
                                                                             chief State School Officers. 2015.
                                                                             Educator Competencies for
                                                                             Personalized, Learner-Centered
                                                                             Teaching. Boston, MA: Jobs for the
                                                                             Future




                                               5
STRUCTURE OF THE STANDARDS
Vɨɵɰɲɱɷ˜ɶ Cɲɵɨ Tɨɤɦɫɬɱɪ Sɷɤɱɧɤɵɧɶ ɤɵɨ ɬɱɷɨɵɵɨɯɤɷɨɧ ɤɱɧ ɲɹɨɵɯɤɳ ɶɬɪɱɬɩɬɦɤɱɷɯɼˉ Wɫɬɯɨ ɨɤɦɫ
standard depicts a discrete aspect of teaching or leading, the actual practice of education
incorporates many standards simultaneously. The ten standards can be grouped into four
general categories: The Learner and Learning, Content, Instructional Practice, and Professional
Responsibility. The categories are further explained by performance and knowledge indicators
and critical dispositions. Performance indicators are included first because they are the aspect of
teaching that can be observed and assessed. Essential Knowledge indicators describe the
knowledge necessary for effective practice. Finally, Critical Dispositions describe the habits of
professional action and moral commitments that underlie the work of educators.
The Content category is depicted as larger than the surrounding standards in the following
diagram to emphasize its centrality to the work of educators. Educators preparing to become
teachers or those planning their professional development process will need to prioritize
content knowledge and application. Additional indicators that illustrate Standard 4: Content
Knowledge and Standard 5: Application of Content can be found in the Vermont Licensing
Endorsements.




                                                 6
USING THE STANDARDS

The Vermont Core Teaching Standards provide a picture of what professional practice looks
like at different developmental stages of a ɷɨɤɦɫɨɵ˜ɶ ɦɤɵɨɨɵˉ Eɧɸɦɤɷɲɵ ɳɵɨɳɤɵɤɷɬɲɱ ɳɵɲɪɵɤɰɶˊ
mentors, and schools can use the standards to support educators as they develop. Educators,
too, can use the standards to help guide their professional practice and growth over time. What
distinguishes a novice from the accomplished teacher is the degree of sophistication in her/his
application of knowledge and skills. Finally, the knowledge and performance indicators are not
intended to be checklists, but instead provide ways to picture what each standard means.




                                               7
                                           Standard #1: Learner Development
The teacher understands how learners grow and develop, recognizing that patterns of learning and
development vary individually within and across the cognitive, linguistic, social, emotional, and physical
areas, and designs and implements developmentally appropriate and challenging learning experiences.

                         Performances                                                  Essential Knowledge
1(a) The teacher regularly assesses individual and group           1(d) The teacher understands how learning occurs-- how
performance in order to design and modify instruction to           learners construct knowledge, acquire skills, and develop
ɰɨɨɷ ɯɨɤɵɱɨɵɶ˜ ɱɨɨɧɶ ɬɱ ɨɤɦɫ ɤɵɨɤ ɲɩ ɧɨɹɨɯɲɳɰɨɱɷ                   disciplined thinking processes--and knows how to use
(cognitive, linguistic, social, emotional, and physical) and       instructional strategies that promote student learning.
scaffolds the next level of development.
                                                                   ȱ˕ɨ˖ Tɫɨ ɷɨɤɦɫɨɵ ɸɱɧɨɵɶɷɤɱɧɶ ɷɫɤɷ ɨɤɦɫ ɯɨɤɵɱɨɵ˜ɶ ɦɲɪɱɬɷɬɹɨˊ
1(b) The teacher creates developmentally appropriate               linguistic, social, emotional, and physical development
instruction thɤɷ ɷɤɮɨɶ ɬɱɷɲ ɤɦɦɲɸɱɷ ɬɱɧɬɹɬɧɸɤɯ ɯɨɤɵɱɨɵɶ˜           influences learning and knows how to make instructional
strengths, interests, and needs and that enables each              ɧɨɦɬɶɬɲɱɶ ɷɫɤɷ ɥɸɬɯɧ ɲɱ ɯɨɤɵɱɨɵɶ˜ ɶɷɵɨɱɪɷɫɶ ɤɱɧ ɱɨɨɧɶˉ
learner to advance and accelerate his/her learning.
                                                                   1(f) The teacher identifies readiness for learning, and
1(c) The teacher collaborates with families, communities,          understands how development in any one area may affect
colleagues, and other professionals to promote learner             performance in others.
growth and development.
                                                                   1(g) The teacher understands the role of language and
                                                                   culture in learning and knows how to modify instruction to
                                                                   make language comprehensible and instruction relevant,
                                                                   accessible, and challenging.
                                                                                       Critical Dispositions
                                                                   ȱ˕ɫ˖ Tɫɨ ɷɨɤɦɫɨɵ ɵɨɶɳɨɦɷɶ ɯɨɤɵɱɨɵɶ˜ ɧɬɩɩɨɵɬɱɪ ɶɷɵɨɱɪɷɫɶ ɤɱɧ
                                                                   needs and is committed to using this information to further
                                                                   ɨɤɦɫ ɯɨɤɵɱɨɵ˜ɶ ɧɨɹɨɯɲɳɰɨɱɷˉ

                                                                   1(i) The teacher is ɦɲɰɰɬɷɷɨɧ ɷɲ ɸɶɬɱɪ ɯɨɤɵɱɨɵɶ˜ ɶɷɵɨɱɪɷɫɶ ɤɶ
                                                                   a basis for growth, and their misconceptions as
                                                                   opportunities for learning.

                                                                   ȱ˕ɭ˖ Tɫɨ ɷɨɤɦɫɨɵ ɷɤɮɨɶ ɵɨɶɳɲɱɶɬɥɬɯɬɷɼ ɩɲɵ ɳɵɲɰɲɷɬɱɪ ɯɨɤɵɱɨɵɶ˜
                                                                   growth and development.

                                                                   1(k) The teacher values the input and contributions of
                                                                   families, colleagues, and other professionals in
                                                                   ɸɱɧɨɵɶɷɤɱɧɬɱɪ ɤɱɧ ɶɸɳɳɲɵɷɬɱɪ ɨɤɦɫ ɯɨɤɵɱɨɵ˜ɶ ɧɨɹɨɯɲɳɰɨɱɷˉ




                                                               8
                                          Standard #2: Learning Differences
The teacher uses understanding of individual differences and diverse cultures and communities to ensure
inclusive learning environments that enable each learner to meet high standards.

                       Performances                                                   Essential Knowledge
2(a) The teacher designs, adapts, and delivers instruction        2(g) The teacher understands and identifies differences in
ɷɲ ɤɧɧɵɨɶɶ ɨɤɦɫ ɶɷɸɧɨɱɷ˜ɶ ɧɬɹɨɵɶɨ ɯɨɤɵɱɬɱɪ ɶɷɵɨɱɪɷɫɶ ɤɱɧ          approaches to learning and performance and knows how to
needs and creates opportunities for students to                   design ɬɱɶɷɵɸɦɷɬɲɱ ɷɫɤɷ ɸɶɨɶ ɨɤɦɫ ɯɨɤɵɱɨɵ˜ɶ ɶɷɵɨɱɪɷɫɶ ɷɲ
demonstrate their learning in different ways.                     promote growth.

2(b) The teacher makes appropriate and timely provisions          2(h) The teacher understands students with exceptional
(e.g., pacing for individual rates of growth, task demands,       needs, including those associated with disabilities and
communication, assessment, and response modes) for                giftedness, and knows how to use strategies and resources
individual students with particular learning differences or       to address these needs.
needs.
                                                                  2(i) The teacher knows about second language acquisition
Ȳ˕ɦ˖ Tɫɨ ɷɨɤɦɫɨɵ ɧɨɶɬɪɱɶ ɬɱɶɷɵɸɦɷɬɲɱ ɷɲ ɥɸɬɯɧ ɲɱ ɯɨɤɵɱɨɵɶ˜        processes and knows how to incorporate instructional
prior knowledge and experiences, allowing learners to             strategies and resources to support language acquisition.
accelerate as they demonstrate their understandings.
                                                                  2(j) The teacher understands that learners bring assets for
2(d) The teacher brings multiple perspectives to the              learning based on their individual experiences, abilities,
ɧɬɶɦɸɶɶɬɲɱ ɲɩ ɦɲɱɷɨɱɷˊ ɬɱɦɯɸɧɬɱɪ ɤɷɷɨɱɷɬɲɱ ɷɲ ɯɨɤɵɱɨɵɶ˜           talents, prior learning, and peer and social group
personal, family, and community experiences and cultural          interactions, as well as language, culture, family, and
norms.                                                            community values.

2(e) The teacher incorporates tools of language                   2(k) The teacher knows how to access information about the
development into planning and instruction, including              values of diverse cultures and communities and how to
strategies for making content accessible to English               ɬɱɦɲɵɳɲɵɤɷɨ ɯɨɤɵɱɨɵɶ˜ ɨɻɳɨɵɬɨɱɦɨɶˊ ɦɸɯɷɸɵɨɶˊ ɤɱɧ ɦɲɰɰɸɱɬɷɼ
language learners and for evaluating and supporting their         resources into instruction.
development of English proficiency.

2(f) The teacher accesses resources, supports, and                                    Critical Dispositions
specialized assistance and services to meet particular            2(l) The teacher believes that all learners can achieve at high
learning differences or needs.                                    levels and persists in helping each learner reach his/her full
                                                                  potential.

                                                                  2(m) The teacher respects learners as individuals with
                                                                  differing personal and family backgrounds and various
                                                                  skills, abilities, perspectives, talents, and interests.

                                                                  2(n) The teacher makes learners feel valued and helps them
                                                                  learn to value each other.

                                                                  2(o) The teacher values diverse languages and dialects and
                                                                  seeks to integrate them into his/her instructional practice to
                                                                  engage students in learning.




                                                              9
                                          Standard #3: Learning Environments
The teacher works with others to create environments that support individual and collaborative learning,
and that encourage positive social interaction, active engagement in learning, and self motivation.

                        Performances                                                    Essential Knowledge
3(a) The teacher collaborates with learners, families, and           3(i) The teacher understands the relationship between
colleagues to build a safe, positive learning climate of             motivation and engagement and knows how to design
openness, mutual respect, support, and inquiry.                      learning experiences using strategies that build learner self-
                                                                     direction and ownership of learning.
3(b) The teacher develops learning experiences that engage
learners in collaborative and self-directed learning and that        3(j) The teacher knows how to help learners work
extend learner interaction with ideas and people locally             productively and cooperatively with each other to achieve
and globally.                                                        learning goals.

3(c) The teacher collaborates with learners and colleagues           3(k) The teacher knows how to collaborate with learners to
to develop shared values and expectations for respectful             establish and monitor elements of a safe and productive
interactions, rigorous academic discussions, and individual          learning environment including norms, expectations,
and group responsibility for quality work.                           routines, and organizational structures.

3(d) The teacher manages the learning environment to                 3(l) The teacher understands how learner diversity can
actively and equitably engage learners by organizing,                affect communication and knows how to communicate
allocating, and coordinating the resources of time, space,           effectively in differing environments.
ɤɱɧ ɯɨɤɵɱɨɵɶ˜ ɤɷɷɨɱɷɬɲɱˉ
                                                                     3(m) The teacher knows how to use technologies and how
3(e) The teacher uses a variety of methods to engage                 to guide learners to apply them in appropriate, safe, and
learners in evaluating the learning environment and                  effective ways.
collaborates with learners to make appropriate
adjustments.
                                                                                          Critical Dispositions
3(f) The teacher communicates verbally and nonverbally in            3(n) The teacher is committed to working with learners,
ways that demonstrate respect for and responsiveness to              colleagues, families, and communities to establish positive
the cultural backgrounds and differing perspectives                  and supportive learning environments.
learners bring to the learning environment.
                                                                     3(o) The teacher values the role of learners in promoting
3(g) The teacher promotes responsible learner use of                 ɨɤɦɫ ɲɷɫɨɵ˜ɶ ɯɨɤɵɱɬɱɪ ɤɱɧ ɵɨɦɲɪɱɬɽɨɶ ɷɫɨ ɬɰɳɲɵɷɤɱɦɨ ɲɩ ɳɨɨɵ
interactive technologies to extend the possibilities for             relationships in establishing a climate of learning.
learning locally and globally.
                                                                     3(p) The teacher is committed to supporting learners as they
3(h) The teacher intentionally builds learner capacity to            participate in decision making, engage in exploration and
collaborate in face-to-face and virtual environments                 invention, work collaboratively and independently, and
through applying effective interpersonal communication               engage in purposeful learning.
skills.
                                                                     3(q) The teacher seeks to foster respectful communication
                                                                     among all members of the learning community.

                                                                     3(r) The teacher is a thoughtful and responsive listener and
                                                                     observer.




                                                                10
                                           Standard #4: Content Knowledge
The teacher understands the central concepts, tools of inquiry, and structures of the discipline(s) he or she
teaches and creates learning experiences that make these aspects of the discipline accessible and meaningful
for learners to assure mastery of the content.

                        Performances                                                      Essential Knowledge
4(a) The teacher effectively uses multiple representations           4(j) The teacher understands major concepts, assumptions,
and explanations that capture key ideas in the discipline,           debates, processes of inquiry, and ways of knowing that are
guide learners through learning progressions, and promote            central to the discipline(s) s/he teaches.
ɨɤɦɫ ɯɨɤɵɱɨɵ˜ɶ ɤɦɫɬɨɹɨɰɨɱɷ ɲɩ ɦɲɱɷɨɱɷ ɶɷɤɱɧɤɵɧɶˉ
                                                                     4(k) The teacher understands common misconceptions in
4(b) The teacher engages students in learning experiences            learning the discipline and how to guide learners to
in the discipline(s) that encourage learners to understand,          accurate conceptual understanding.
question, and analyze ideas from diverse perspectives so
that they master the content.                                        4(l) The teacher knows and uses the academic language of
                                                                     the discipline and knows how to make it accessible to
4(c) The teacher engages learners in applying methods of             learners.
inquiry and standards of evidence used in the discipline.
                                                                     4(m) The teacher knows how to integrate culturally relevant
4(d) The teacher stimulates learner reflection on prior              ɦɲɱɷɨɱɷ ɷɲ ɥɸɬɯɧ ɲɱ ɯɨɤɵɱɨɵɶ˜ ɥɤɦɮɪɵɲɸɱɧ ɮɱɲɺɯɨɧɪɨˉ
content knowledge, links new concepts to familiar
ɦɲɱɦɨɳɷɶˊ ɤɱɧ ɰɤɮɨɶ ɦɲɱɱɨɦɷɬɲɱɶ ɷɲ ɯɨɤɵɱɨɵɶ˜ ɨɻɳɨɵɬɨɱɦɨɶˉ            4(n) The teacher has a deep knowledge of student content
                                                                     standards and learning progressions in the discipline(s)
4(e) The teacher recognizes learner misconceptions in a              s/he teaches.
discipline that interfere with learning, and creates                                     Critical Dispositions
experiences to build accurate conceptual understanding.              4(o) The teacher realizes that content knowledge is not a
                                                                     fixed body of facts but is complex, culturally situated, and
4(f) The teacher evaluates and modifies instructional                ever evolving. S/he keeps abreast of new ideas and
resources and curriculum materials for their                         understandings in the field.
comprehensiveness, accuracy for representing particular
concepts in the discipline, and appropriateness for his/ her         4(p) The teacher appreciates multiple perspectives within
learners.                                                            ɷɫɨ ɧɬɶɦɬɳɯɬɱɨ ɤɱɧ ɩɤɦɬɯɬɷɤɷɨɶ ɯɨɤɵɱɨɵɶ˜ ɦɵɬɷɬɦɤɯ ɤɱɤɯɼɶɬɶ ɲɩ
                                                                     these perspectives.
4(g) The teacher uses supplementary resources and
technologies effectively to ensure accessibility and                 4(q) The teacher recognizes the potential of bias in his/her
relevance for all learners.                                          representation of the discipline and seeks to appropriately
                                                                     address problems of bias.
4(h) The teacher creates opportunities for students to learn,
practice, and master academic language in their content.             ȴ˕ɵ˖ Tɫɨ ɷɨɤɦɫɨɵ ɬɶ ɦɲɰɰɬɷɷɨɧ ɷɲ ɺɲɵɮ ɷɲɺɤɵɧ ɨɤɦɫ ɯɨɤɵɱɨɵ˜ɶ
                                                                     mastery of disciplinary content and skills.
4(i) The teacher accesses school and/or district-based
resources to evaluate learners content knowledge in their
primary language.




                                                                11
                                           Standard #5: Application of Content
The teacher understands how to connect concepts and use differing perspectives to engage learners in
critical thinking, creativity, and collaborative problem solving related to authentic local and global issues.

                        Performances                                                       Essential Knowledge
5(a) The teacher develops and implements projects that                 5(i) The teacher understands the ways of knowing in his/her
guide learners in analyzing the complexities of an issue or            discipline, how it relates to other disciplinary approaches to
question using perspectives from varied disciplines and                inquiry, and the strengths and limitations of each approach
cross-disciplinary skills (e.g., a water quality study that            in addressing problems, issues, and concerns.
draws upon biology and chemistry to look at factual
information and social studies to examine policy                       5(j) The teacher understands how current interdisciplinary
implications).                                                         themes (e.g., civic literacy, health literacy, global awareness)
                                                                       connect to the core subjects and knows how to weave those
5(b) The teacher engages learners in applying content                  themes into meaningful learning experiences.
knowledge to real world problems through the lens of
interdisciplinary themes (e.g., financial literacy,                    5(k) The teacher understands the demands of accessing and
environmental literacy).                                               managing information as well as how to evaluate issues of
                                                                       ethics and quality related to information and its use.
ȵ˕ɦ˖ Tɫɨ ɷɨɤɦɫɨɵ ɩɤɦɬɯɬɷɤɷɨɶ ɯɨɤɵɱɨɵɶ˜ ɸɶɨ ɲɩ ɦɸɵrent tools and
resources to maximize content learning in varied contexts.             5(l) The teacher understands how to use digital and
                                                                       interactive technologies for efficiently and effectively
5(d) The teacher engages learners in questioning and                   achieving specific learning goals.
challenging assumptions and approaches in order to foster
innovation and problem solving in local and global                     5(m) The teacher understands critical thinking processes
contexts.                                                              and knows how to help learners develop high level
                                                                       questioning skills to promote their independent learning.
5(e) The ɷɨɤɦɫɨɵ ɧɨɹɨɯɲɳɶ ɯɨɤɵɱɨɵɶ˜ ɦɲɰɰɸɱɬɦɤɷɬɲɱ ɶɮɬɯɯɶ ɬɱ
disciplinary and interdisciplinary contexts by creating                5(n) The teacher understands communication modes and
meaningful opportunities to employ a variety of forms of               skills as vehicles for learning (e.g., information gathering
communication that address varied audiences and                        and processing) across disciplines as well as vehicles for
purposes.                                                              expressing learning.

5(f) The teacher engages learners in generating and                    5(o) The teacher understands creative thinking processes
evaluating new ideas and novel approaches, seeking                     and how to engage learners in producing original work.
inventive solutions to problems, and developing original
work.                                                                  5(p) The teacher knows where and how to access resources
                                                                       to build global awareness and understanding, and how to
ȵ˕ɪ˖ Tɫɨ ɷɨɤɦɫɨɵ ɩɤɦɬɯɬɷɤɷɨɶ ɯɨɤɵɱɨɵɶ˜ ɤɥɬɯɬɷɼ ɷɲ ɧɨɹɨɯɲɳ              integrate them into the curriculum.
diverse social and cultural perspectives that expand their                                  Critical Dispositions
understanding of local and global issues and create novel              5(q) The teacher is constantly exploring how to use
approaches to solving problems.                                        disciplinary knowledge as a lens to address local and global
                                                                       issues.
5(h) The teacher develops and implements supports for
learner literacy development across content areas.                     5(r) The teacher values knowledge outside his/her own
                                                                       content area and how such knowledge enhances student
                                                                       learning.

                                                                       5(s) The teacher values flexible learning environments that
                                                                       encourage learner exploration, discovery, and expression
                                                                       across content areas.




                                                                  12
                                                Standard #6: Assessment
The teacher understands and uses multiple methods of assessment to engage learners in their own growth,
ɷɲ ɰɲɱɬɷɲɵ ɯɨɤɵɱɨɵ ɳɵɲɪɵɨɶɶˊ ɤɱɧ ɷɲ ɪɸɬɧɨ ɷɫɨ ɷɨɤɦɫɨɵ˜ɶ ɤɱɧ ɯɨɤɵɱɨɵ˜ɶ ɧɨɦɬɶɬɲɱ ɰɤɮɬɱɪˉ

                       Performances                                                     Essential Knowledge
6(a) The teacher balances the use of formative, interim, and        6(j) The teacher understands the differences between
summative assessment as appropriate to support, verify,             formative, interim, and summative applications of
and document learning.                                              assessment and knows how and when to use each.

6(b) The teacher designs assessments that match learning            6(k) The teacher understands the range of types and
objectives with assessment methods and minimizes sources            multiple purposes of assessment and how to design, adapt,
of bias that can distort assessment results.                        or select appropriate assessments to address specific
                                                                    learning goals and individual differences, and to minimize
6(c) The teacher works independently and collaboratively            sources of bias.
to examine test and other performance data to understand
ɨɤɦɫ ɯɨɤɵɱɨɵ˜ɶ ɳɵɲɪɵɨɶɶ ɤɱɧ ɷɲ ɪɸɬɧɨ ɳɯɤɱɱɬɱɪˉ                      6(l) The teacher knows how to analyze assessment data to
                                                                    understand patterns and gaps in learning, to guide planning
6(d) The teacher engages learners in understanding and              and instruction, and to provide meaningful feedback to all
identifying quality work and provides them with effective           learners.
descriptive feedback to guide their progress toward that
work.                                                               6(m) The teacher knows when and how to engage learners
                                                                    in analyzing their own assessment results and in helping to
6(e) The teacher engages learners in multiple ways of               set goals for their own learning.
demonstrating knowledge and skill as part of the
assessment process.                                                 6(n) The teacher understands the positive impact of effective
                                                                    descriptive feedback for learners and knows a variety of
6(f) The teacher models and structures processes that guide         strategies for communicating this feedback.
learners in examining their own thinking and learning as
well as the performance of others.                                  6(o) The teacher knows when and how to evaluate and
                                                                    report learner progress against standards.
6(g) The teacher effectively uses multiple and appropriate
ɷɼɳɨɶ ɲɩ ɤɶɶɨɶɶɰɨɱɷ ɧɤɷɤ ɷɲ ɬɧɨɱɷɬɩɼ ɨɤɦɫ ɶɷɸɧɨɱɷ˜ɶ ɯɨɤɵɱɬɱɪ        6(p) The teacher understands how to prepare learners for
needs and to develop differentiated learning experiences.           assessments and how to make accommodations in
                                                                    assessments and testing conditions, especially for learners
6(h) The teacher prepares all learners for the demands of           with disabilities and language learning needs.
particular assessment formats and makes appropriate                                      Critical Dispositions
accommodations in assessments or testing conditions,                6(q) The teacher is committed to engaging learners actively
especially for learners with disabilities and language              in assessment processes and to developing each ɯɨɤɵɱɨɵ˜ɶ
learning needs.                                                     capacity to review and communicate about their own
                                                                    progress and learning.
6(i) The teacher continually seeks appropriate ways to
employ technology to support assessment practice both to            6(r) The teacher takes responsibility for aligning instruction
engage learners more fully and to assess and address                and assessment with learning goals.
learner needs.
                                                                    6(s) The teacher is committed to providing timely and effective
                                                                    descriptive feedback to learners on their progress.

                                                                    6(t) The teacher is committed to using multiple types of
                                                                    assessment processes to support, verify, and document
                                                                    learning.
                                                                                         Critical Dispositions
                                                                    6(u) The teacher is committed to making accommodations in
                                                                    assessments and testing conditions, especially for learners
                                                                    with disabilities and language learning needs.




                                                               13
     6(v) The teacher is committed to the ethical use of various
     assessments and assessment data to identify learner
     strengths and needs to promote learner growth. 6(s) The
     teacher is committed to providing timely and effective
     descriptive feedback to learners on their progress.




14
                                         Standard #7: Planning for Instruction
The teacher plans instruction that supports every student in meeting rigorous learning goals by drawing
upon knowledge of content areas, curriculum, cross-disciplinary skills, and pedagogy, as well as
knowledge of learners and the community context.

                       Performances                                                    Essential Knowledge
7(a) The teacher individually and collaboratively selects           7(g) The teacher understands content and content standards
and creates learning experiences that are appropriate for           and how these are organized in the curriculum.
curriculum goals and content standards, and are relevant
to learners.                                                        7(h) The teacher understands how integrating cross
                                                                    disciplinary skills in instruction engages learners
7(b) The teacher plans ɫɲɺ ɷɲ ɤɦɫɬɨɹɨ ɨɤɦɫ ɶɷɸɧɨɱɷ˜ɶ                purposefully in applying content knowledge.
learning goals, choosing appropriate strategies and
accommodations, resources, and materials to differentiate           7(i) The teacher understands learning theory, human
instruction for individuals and groups of learners.                 development, cultural diversity, and individual differences
                                                                    and how these impact ongoing planning.
7(c) The teacher develops appropriate sequencing of
learning experiences and provides multiple ways to                  7(j) The teacher understands the strengths and needs of
demonstrate knowledge and skill.                                    individual learners and how to plan instruction that is
                                                                    responsive to these strengths and needs.
7(d) The teacher plans for instruction based on formative,
interim, and summative assessment data, prior learner               7(k) The teacher knows a range of evidence-based
knowledge, and learner interest.                                    instructional strategies, resources, and technological tools
                                                                    and how to use them effectively to plan instruction that
7(e) The teacher plans collaboratively with professionals           meets diverse learning needs.
who have specialized expertise (e.g., special educators,
related service providers, language learning specialists,           7(l) The teacher knows when and how to adjust plans based
librarians, media specialists) to design and jointly deliver        on assessment information and learner responses.
as appropriate learning experiences to meet unique
learning needs.                                                     7(m) The teacher knows when and how to access resources
                                                                    and collaborate with others to support student learning
7(f) The teacher evaluates plans in relation to short- and          (e.g., special educators, related service providers, language
long-range goals and systematically adjusts plans to meet           learner specialists, librarians, media specialists, community
ɨɤɦɫ ɶɷɸɧɨɱɷ˜ɶ ɯɨɤɵɱɬɱɪ ɱɨɨɧɶ ɤɱɧ ɨɱɫɤɱɦɨ ɯɨɤɵɱɬɱɪˉ                 organizations).
                                                                                          Critical Dispositions
                                                                    7(n) The teacher respeɦɷɶ ɯɨɤɵɱɨɵɶ˜ ɧɬɹɨɵɶɨ ɶɷɵɨɱɪɷɫɶ and
                                                                    needs and is committed to using this information to plan
                                                                    effective instruction.

                                                                    7(o) The teacher values planning as a collegial activity that
                                                                    takes into consideration the input of learners, colleagues,
                                                                    families, and the larger community.

                                                                    7(p) The teacher takes professional responsibility to use
                                                                    short- and long-term planning as a means of assuring
                                                                    student learning.

                                                                    7(q) The teacher believes that plans must always be open to
                                                                    adjustment and revision based on learner needs and
                                                                    changing circumstances.




                                                               15
                                          Standard #8: Instructional Strategies
The teacher understands and uses a variety of instructional strategies to encourage learners to develop deep
understanding of content areas and their connections, and to build skills to apply knowledge in meaningful
ways.

                        Performances                                                      Essential Knowledge
8(a) The teacher uses appropriate strategies and resources            8(j) The teacher understands the cognitive processes
to adapt instruction to the needs of individuals and groups           associated with various kinds of learning (e.g., critical and
of learners.                                                          creative thinking, problem framing and problem solving,
                                                                      invention, memorization and recall) and how these
8(b) The teacher continuously monitors student learning,              processes can be stimulated.
engages learners in assessing their progress, and adjusts
instruction in response to student learning needs.                    8(k) The teacher knows how to apply a range of
                                                                      developmentally, culturally, and linguistically appropriate
8(c) The teacher collaborates with learners to design and             instructional strategies to achieve learning goals.
implement relevant learning experiences, identify their
strengths, and access family and community resources to               8(l) The teacher knows when and how to use appropriate
develop their areas of interest.                                      strategies to differentiate instruction and engage all learners
                                                                      in complex thinking and meaningful tasks.
8(d) The teacher varies his/her role in the instructional
process (e.g., instructor, facilitator, coach, audience) in           8(m) The teacher understands how multiple forms of
relation to the content and purposes of instruction and the           communication (oral, written, nonverbal, digital, visual)
needs of learners.                                                    convey ideas, foster self expression, and build relationships.

8(e) The teacher provides multiple models and                         8(n) The teacher knows how to use a wide variety of
representations of concepts and skills with opportunities             resources, including human and technological, to engage
for learners to demonstrate their knowledge through a                 students in learning.
variety of products and performances.
                                                                      8(o) The teacher understands how content and skill
8(f) The teacher engages all learners in developing higher            development can be supported by media and technology
order questioning skills and metacognitive processes.                 and knows how to evaluate these resources for quality,
                                                                      accuracy, and effectiveness.
8(g) The teacher engages learners in using a range of                                      Critical Dispositions
learning skills and technology tools to access, interpret,            8(p) The teacher is committed to deepening awareness and
evaluate, and apply information.                                      understanding the strengths and needs of diverse learners
                                                                      when planning and adjusting instruction.
8(h) The teacher uses a variety of instructional strategies to
ɶɸɳɳɲɵɷ ɤɱɧ ɨɻɳɤɱɧ ɯɨɤɵɱɨɵɶ˜ ɦɲɰɰɸɱɬɦɤɷɬɲɱ ɷɫɵɲɸɪɫ                    8(q) The teacher values the variety of ways people
speaking, listening, reading, writing, and other modes.               communicate and encourages learners to develop and use
                                                                      multiple forms of communication.
8(i) The teacher asks questions to stimulate discussion that
serves different purposes (e.g., probing for learner                  8(r) The teacher is committed to exploring how the use of
understanding, helping learners articulate their ideas and            new and emerging technologies can support and promote
thinking processes, stimulating curiosity, and helping                student learning.
learners to question).
                                                                      8(s) The teacher values flexibility and reciprocity in the
                                                                      teaching process as necessary for adapting instruction to
                                                                      learner responses, ideas, and needs.




                                                                 16
                             Standard #9: Professional Learning and Ethical Practice
The teacher engages in ongoing professional learning and uses evidence to continually evaluate his/her
practice, particularly the effects of his/her choices and actions on others (learners, families, other
professionals, and the community), and adapts practice to meet the needs of each learner.

                      Performances                                                       Essential Knowledge
9(a) The teacher engages in ongoing learning opportunities          9(g) The teacher understands and knows how to use a
to develop knowledge and skills in order to provide all             variety of self-assessment and problem-solving strategies to
learners with engaging curriculum and learning                      analyze and reflect on his/her practice and to plan for
experiences based on local and state standards.                     adaptations/adjustments.

9(b) The teacher engages in meaningful and appropriate              9(h) The teacher knows how to use learner data to analyze
professional learning experiences aligned with his/her own          practice and differentiate instruction accordingly.
needs and the needs of the learners, school, and system.
                                                                    9(i) The teacher understands how personal identity,
9(c) Independently and in collaboration with colleagues,            worldview, and prior experience affect perceptions and
the teacher uses a variety of data (e.g., systematic                expectations, and recognizes how they may bias behaviors
observation, information about learners, research) to               and interactions with others.
evaluate the outcomes of teaching and learning and to
adapt planning and practice.                                        ȹ˕ɭ˖ Tɫɨ ɷɨɤɦɫɨɵ ɸɱɧɨɵɶɷɤɱɧɶ ɯɤɺɶ ɵɨɯɤɷɨɧ ɷɲ ɯɨɤɵɱɨɵɶ˜ ɵɬɪɫɷɶ
                                                                    and teacher responsibilities (e.g., for educational equity,
9(d) The teacher actively seeks professional, community,            appropriate education for learners with disabilities,
and technological resources, within and outside the school,         confidentiality, privacy, appropriate treatment of learners,
as supports for analysis, reflection, and problem-solving.          reporting in situations related to possible child abuse).

9(e) The teacher reflects on his/her personal biases and            9(k) The teacher knows how to build and implement a plan
accesses resources to deepen his/her own understanding of           for professional growth directly aligned with his/her needs
cultural, ethnic, gender, and learning differences to build         as a growing professional using feedback from teacher
stronger relationships and create more relevant learning            evaluations and observations, data on learner performance,
experiences.                                                        and school- and system-wide priorities.

9(f) The teacher advocates, models, and teaches safe, legal,                            Critical Dispositions
and ethical use of information and technology including             9(l) The teacher takes responsibility for student learning
appropriate documentation of sources and respect for                and uses ongoing analysis and reflection to improve
others in the use of social media.                                  planning and practice.

                                                                    9(m) The teacher is committed to deepening understanding
                                                                    of his/her own frames of reference (e.g., culture, gender,
                                                                    language, abilities, ways of knowing), the potential biases in
                                                                    these frames, and their impact on expectations for and
                                                                    relationships with learners and their families.

                                                                    9(n) The teacher sees him/herself as a learner, continuously
                                                                    seeking opportunities to draw upon current education
                                                                    policy and research as sources of analysis and reflection to
                                                                    improve practice.

                                                                    9(o) The teacher understands the expectations of the
                                                                    profession including codes of ethics, professional standards
                                                                    of practice, and relevant law and policy.




                                                               17
                                    Standard #10: Leadership and Collaboration
The teacher seeks appropriate leadership roles and opportunities to take responsibility for student learning,
to collaborate with learners, families, colleagues, other school professionals, and community members to
ensure learner growth, and to advance the profession.

                       Performances                                                       Essential Knowledge
10(a) The teacher takes an active role on the instructional          10(l) The teacher understands schools as organizations
team, giving and receiving feedback on practice,                     within a historical, cultural, political, and social context and
examining learner work, analyzing data from multiple                 knows how to work with others across the system to
sources, and sharing responsibility for decision making              support learners.
ɤɱɧ ɤɦɦɲɸɱɷɤɥɬɯɬɷɼ ɩɲɵ ɨɤɦɫ ɶɷɸɧɨɱɷ˜ɶ ɯɨɤɵɱɬɱɪˉ
                                                                     10(m) The teacher understands that alignment of family,
10(b) The teacher works with other school professionals to           school, and community spheres of influence enhances
plan and jointly facilitate learning on how to meet diverse          student learning and that discontinuity in these spheres of
needs of learners.                                                   influence interferes with learning.

10(c) The teacher engages collaboratively in the schoolwide          10(n) The teacher knows how to work with other adults and
effort to build a shared vision and supportive culture,              has developed skills in collaborative interaction appropriate
identify common goals, and monitor and evaluate progress             for both face-to-face and virtual contexts.
toward those goals.
                                                                     10(o) The teacher knows how to contribute to a common
10(d) The teacher works collaboratively with learners and            culture that supports high expectations for student
their families to establish mutual expectations and ongoing          learning.
communication to support learner development and
achievement.                                                                             Critical Dispositions

10(e) Working with school colleagues, the teacher builds             10(p) The teacher actively shares responsibility for shaping
ongoing connections with community resources to                      and supporting the mission of his/her school as one of
enhance student learning and well-being.                             advocacy for learners and accountability for their success.


10(f) The teacher engages in professional learning,                  10(q) The teacher ɵɨɶɳɨɦɷɶ ɩɤɰɬɯɬɨɶ˜ ɥɨɯɬɨɩɶˊ ɱɲɵɰɶˊ ɤɱɧ
contributes to the knowledge and skill of others, and                expectations and seeks to work collaboratively with
works collaboratively to advance professional practice.              learners and families in setting and meeting challenging
                                                                     goals.
10(g) The teacher uses technological tools and a variety of
communication strategies to build local and global                   10(r) The teacher takes initiative to grow and develop with
learning communities that engage learners, families, and             colleagues through interactions that enhance practice and
colleagues.                                                          support student learning.

10(h) The teacher uses and generates meaningful research             10(s) The teacher takes responsibility for contributing to
on education issues and policies.                                    and advancing the profession.

10(i) The teacher seeks appropriate opportunities to model           10(t) The teacher embraces the challenge of continuous
effective practice for colleagues, to lead professional              improvement and change.
learning activities, and to serve in other leadership roles.

10(j) The teacher advocates to meet the needs of learners, to
strengthen the learning environment, and to enact system
change.

10(k) The teacher takes on leadership roles at the school,
district, state, and/or national level and advocates for
learners, the school, the community, and the profession.



                                                                18
REFERENCES
Council of Chief State School Officers. (2011, April). Interstate Teacher Assessment and
     Support Consortium (InTASC) Model Core Teaching Standards: A Resource for State
     Dialogue. Washington, DC: Author.
Gɲɨˊ Lɤɸɵɤˉ ȲȰȰȷˉ ȃTɫɨ Lɬɱɮ Bɨɷɺɨɨɱ Tɨɤɦɫɨɵ Qɸɤɯɬɷɼ ɤɱɧ Sɷɸɧɨɱɷ Oɸɷɦɲɰɨɶˋ A Rɨɶɨɤɵɦɫ
    SɼɱɷɫɨɶɬɶˉȄ Wɤɶɫɬɱɪɷɲɱˊ DˉCˉˋ Nɤɷɬɲɱɤɯ Cɲɰɳɵɨɫɨɱɶɬɹɨ Cɨɱɷɨɵ ɲɱ Tɨɤɦɫɨɵ Qɸɤɯɬɷɼ
Jobs for the Future & the Council of Chief State School Officers. 2015. Educator Competencies for
     Personalized, Learner-Centered Teaching. Boston, MA: Jobs for the Future.
Hɤɱɸɶɫɨɮˊ Eɵɬɦ Aˉˊ Jɲɫɱ Fˉ Kɤɬɱˊ ɤɱɧ Sɷɨɹɨɱ Gˉ Rɬɹɮɬɱˉ ȱȹȹȸˉ ȃTɨɤɦɫɨɵɶˊ Sɦɫɲɲɯɶˊ ɤɱɧ
     Academɬɦ AɦɫɬɨɹɨɰɨɱɷˉȄ Nɨɺ Yɲɵɮˋ Nɤɷɬɲɱɤɯ Bɸɵɨɤɸ ɲɩ Eɦɲɱɲɰɬɦ Rɨɶɨɤɵɦɫ Wɲɵɮɬɱɪ
     Paper No. 6691
Sawchuk, S., "EWA Research Brief: What Studies Say About Teacher Effectiveness," 2011.
     National Education Writers Association.
     http://www.ewa.org/site/PageServer?pagename=research_teacher_effectiveness
.




                                                19
Supporting Effective
Leadership in Vermont
      Core Leadership Standards for Vermont Educators




                     20
INTRODUCTION:
Core Leadership Standards

In the fall of 2011, the Vermont Standards Board for Professional Educators (VSBPE) voted to
adopt the 2008 Interstate School Leaders Licensure Consortium (ISLLC) Educational Leadership
Policy Standards. The VSBPE had last adopted requirements for administrators in 1998, so the
need for new standards was essential given the changes over time in the roles and
responsibilities of educational leaders.

Each standard was reinforced by functions that described the actions for which school leaders
are responsible. The functions were further defined by knowledge and performance indicators
which mirrored the format of the Vermont Core Teaching Standards (also adopted by the
VSBPE in 2011).

In November of 2016, the VSBPE adopted the 2015 Professional            2015 Standards embody a
Standards for Educational Leaders (PSEL). Formerly known as             research- and practice-based
the ISLLC Standards, the PSEL are based on current research and         understanding of the
the experiences of educational leaders.                                 relationship between
                                                                        education leadership and
The 2015 Leadership Standards were created for and by the               student learning.
profession and were developed based on research and input from
ɷɲɧɤɼ˜ɶ ɳɵɤɦɷɬɦɬɱɪ ɨɧɸɦɤɷɬɲɱɤɯ ɯɨɤɧɨɵɶ ɷɲ ɬɧɨɱɷɬɩɼ ɲɰɬɶɶɬɲɱɶ ɬɱ ɷɫɨ 1   National Policy Board for educational
2008 Leadership Standards, and the demands of educational               Administration (2015) Professional Standards
                                                                        for Educational Leaders 2015. Reston, VA:
leaders today while considering future demands. The Standards           Author
are for all levels of educational leadership regardless of where
they are in their administrative career.

The current standards (2015) have a stronger emphasis on
ɶɷɸɧɨɱɷɶ ɤɱɧ ɶɷɸɧɨɱɷ ɯɨɤɵɱɬɱɪ ɷɲ ɥɨɷɷɨɵ ɳɵɨɳɤɵɨ ɷɲɧɤɼ˜ɶ ɶɷɸɧɨɱɷɶ        Educators have a better
for a productive role in the 21st century.                              understanding of how and in
                                                                        what ways effective leadership
While the 2008 Leadership Standards were composed of six                contributes to student
standards, the updated 2015 version contains ten standards that         achievement. An expanding
are interrelated to better promote academic and personal success        base of knowledge from
for students.                                                           research and practice shows that
                                                                        educational leaders exert
                                                                        influence on student
Each standard, as with the previous version, is supported by
                                                                        achievement by creating
functions that describe the actions for which educational leaders       challenging but also caring and
are responsible. The 2015 Leadership Standards are grouped into         supportive conditions
three clusters with the exception of one standard:                      conducive to each student’s
                                                                        learning.
                                                                        National Policy Board for educational
                                                                        Administration (2015) Professional Standards
                                                                        for Educational Leaders 2015. Reston, VA:
                                                                        Author




                                                21
Cluster One:

     Standard 1: Mission, Vision, and Core Values
     Standard 2: Ethics and Professional Norms
     Standard 3: Equity and Cultural Responsiveness

Cluster Two:

     Standard 4: Curriculum, Instruction, and Assessment
     Standard 5: Community of Care and Support for Students

Cluster Three:

     Standard 6: Professional Capacity of School Personnel
     Standard 7: Professional Community for Teachers and Staff
     Standard 8: Meaningful Engagement of Families and Community
     Standard 9: Operations and Management

Standard 10:

     Standard 10: School Improvement stands alone as it impacts all the other clusters, and
                  together with the three clusters, collectively impact student learning.

The 2015 Leadership Standards create and set direction for current educational leaders, serving
as a basis for policy, preparation, licensure, professional learning, and evaluation.

Finally, the VSBPE acknowledges the importance of continued professional growth in relation to
the standards. What distinguishes levels of proficiency among those in leadership roles is the
degree of sophistication in their application of the knowledge and skills required to lead.
Educational leaders in different positions and at different points in their careers can be expected
to meet these performance standards at increasingly higher levels of effectiveness as they
develop professionally.

 In September 2017, the Chief Council of State School Officers (CCSSO) and Jobs for the Future
(JFF) published a companion document to Educator Competencies for Personalized, Learning-
Centered Teaching for educational leaders entitled: Leadership Competencies for Learning-
Centered, Personalized Education. The competencies begin to define the knowledge, skills, and
dispositions needed by educational leaders to design and cultivate a learner-centered,
personalized learning environment for all learners.




                                                 22
                         Vermont Leadership Standards




National Policy Board for Educational Administration (2015). Professional Standards for
      Educational Leaders 2015. Reston, VA: Author




                                           23
          Professional Standards for Educational Leaders 2015
STANDARD 1. MISSION, VISION, AND CORE VALUES
Effective educational leaders develop, advocate, and enact a shared mission, vision, and core
values of high-quality education and academic success and well-being of each student.

STANDARD 2. ETHICS AND PROFESSIONAL NORMS
Effective educational leaders act ethically and according to professional norms to promote each
ɶɷɸɧɨɱɷ˜ɶ ɤɦɤɧɨɰɬɦ ɶɸɦɦɨɶɶ ɤɱɧ ɺɨɯɯ-being.

STANDARD 3. EQUITY AND CULTURAL RESPONSIVENESS
Effective educational leaders strive for equity of educational opportunity and culturally
ɵɨɶɳɲɱɶɬɹɨ ɳɵɤɦɷɬɦɨɶ ɷɲ ɳɵɲɰɲɷɨ ɨɤɦɫ ɶɷɸɧɨɱɷ˜ɶ ɤɦɤɧɨɰɬɦ ɶɸɦɦɨɶɶ ɤɱɧ well-being.

STANDARD 4. CURRICULUM, INSTRUCTION, AND ASSESSMENT
Effective educational leaders develop and support intellectually rigorous and coherent systems
ɲɩ ɦɸɵɵɬɦɸɯɸɰˊ ɬɱɶɷɵɸɦɷɬɲɱˊ ɤɱɧ ɤɶɶɨɶɶɰɨɱɷ ɷɲ ɳɵɲɰɲɷɨ ɨɤɦɫ ɶɷɸɧɨɱɷ˜ɶ ɤɦɤɧɨɰɬɦ ɶɸɦɦɨɶɶ ɤɱɧ
well-being.

STANDARD 5. COMMUNITY OF CARE AND SUPPORT FOR STUDENTS
Effective educational leaders cultivate an inclusive, caring, and supportive school community
that promotes the academic success and well-being of each student.

STANDARD 6. PROFESSIONAL CAPACITY OF SCHOOL PERSONNEL
Effective educational leaders develop the professional capacity and practice of school personnel
ɷɲ ɳɵɲɰɲɷɨ ɨɤɦɫ ɶɷɸɧɨɱɷ˜ɶ ɤɦɤɧɨɰɬɦ ɶɸɦɦɨɶɶ ɤɱɧ ɺɨɯɯ-being.

STANDARD 7. PROFESSIONAL COMMUNITY FOR TEACHERS AND STAFF
Effective educational leaders foster a professional community of teachers and other professional
ɶɷɤɩɩ ɷɲ ɳɵɲɰɲɷɨ ɨɤɦɫ ɶɷɸɧɨɱɷ˜ɶ ɤɦɤɧɨɰɬɦ ɶɸɦɦɨɶɶ ɤɱɧ ɺɨɯɯ-being.

STANDARD 8. MEANINGFUL ENGAGEMENT OF FAMILIES AND
COMMUNITY
Effective educational leaders engage families and the community in meaningful, reciprocal, and
ɰɸɷɸɤɯɯɼ ɥɨɱɨɩɬɦɬɤɯ ɺɤɼɶ ɷɲ ɳɵɲɰɲɷɨ ɨɤɦɫ ɶɷɸɧɨɱɷ˜ɶ ɤɦɤɧɨɰɬɦ ɶɸɦɦɨɶɶ ɤɱɧ ɺɨɯɯ-being.

STANDARD 9. OPERATIONS AND MANAGEMENT
Effective educational leaders manage school operations and resources to promote each
ɶɷɸɧɨɱɷ˜ɶ ɤɦɤɧɨɰɬɦ ɶɸɦɦɨɶɶ ɤɱɧ ɺɨɯɯ-being.

STANDARD 10. SCHOOL IMPROVEMENT
Effective educational leaders act as agents of continuous improvement to promote each
ɶɷɸɧɨɱɷ˜ɶ ɤɦɤɧɨɰɬɦ ɶɸɦɦɨɶɶ ɤɱɧ ɺɨɯɯ-being.




                                               24
                               STANDARD 1:
                    MISSION, VISION, AND CORE VALUES

Effective educational leaders develop, advocate, and enact a shared mission, vision,
and core values of high-quality education and academic success and well-being of
each student.

Effective leaders:
   a) Develop an educational mission for the school to promote the academic success
       and well-being of each student.
   b) In collaboration with members of the school and the community and using
       relevant data, develop and promote a vision for the school on the successful
       learning and development of each child and on instructional and organizational
       practices that promote such success.
   c) Aɵɷɬɦɸɯɤɷɨˊ ɤɧɹɲɦɤɷɨˊ ɤɱɧ ɦɸɯɷɬɹɤɷɨ ɦɲɵɨ ɹɤɯɸɨɶ ɷɫɤɷ ɧɨɩɬɱɨ ɷɫɨ ɶɦɫɲɲɯ˜ɶ ɦɸɯɷɸɵɨ
       and stress the imperative of child-centered education; high expectations and
       student support; equity, inclusiveness, and social justice; openness, caring, and
       trust; and continuous improvement.
   d) Strategically develop, implement, and evaluate actions to achieve the vision for
       the school.
   e) Rɨɹɬɨɺ ɷɫɨ ɶɦɫɲɲɯ˜ɶ ɰɬɶɶɬɲɱ ɤɱɧ ɹɬɶɬɲɱ ɤɱɧ ɤɧɭɸɶɷ ɷɫɨɰ ɷɲ ɦɫɤɱɪɬɱɪ ɨɻɳɨɦɷations
       and opportunities for the school, and changing needs and situations of students.
   f) Develop shared understanding of and commitment to mission, vision, and core
       values within the school and the community.
   g) Mɲɧɨɯ ɤɱɧ ɳɸɵɶɸɨ ɷɫɨ ɶɦɫɲɲɯ˜ɶ ɰɬɶɶɬɲɱˊ ɹɬɶɬɲɱˊ ɤnd core values in all aspects of
       leadership.




                                           25
                              STANDARD 2:
                    ETHICS AND PROFESSIONAL NORMS

Effective educational leaders act ethically and according to professional norms to
promote each student’s academic success and well-being.

Effective leaders:
   a) Act ethically and professionally in personal conduct, relationships with others,
       decision-ɰɤɮɬɱɪˊ ɶɷɨɺɤɵɧɶɫɬɳ ɲɩ ɷɫɨ ɶɦɫɲɲɯ˜ɶ ɵɨɶɲɸɵɦɨɶˊ ɤɱɧ ɤɯɯ ɤɶɳɨɦɷɶ ɲɩ ɶɦɫɲɲɯ
       leadership.
   b) Act according to and promote the professional norms of integrity, fairness,
       transparency, trust, collaboration, perseverance, learning, and continuous
       improvement.
   c) Place children at the center of education and accept responsibility for each
       ɶɷɸɧɨɱɷ˜ɶ ɤɦɤɧɨɰɬɦ ɶɸɦɦɨɶɶ ɤɱɧ ɺɨɯɯ-being.
   d) Safeguard and promote the values of democracy, individual freedom and
       responsibility, equity, social justice, community, and diversity.
   e) Lead with interpersonal and communication skill, social-emotional insight, and
       ɸɱɧɨɵɶɷɤɱɧɬɱɪ ɲɩ ɤɯɯ ɶɷɸɧɨɱɷɶ˜ ɤɱɧ ɶɷɤɩɩ ɰɨɰɥɨɵɶ˜ ɥɤɦɮɪɵɲɸɱɧɶ ɤɱɧ ɦɸɯɷɸɵɨɶˉ
   f) Provide moral direction for the school and promote ethical and professional
       behavior among faculty and staff.




                                           26
                             STANDARD 3:
                 EQUITY AND CULTURAL RESPONSIVENESS

Effective educational leaders strive for equity of educational opportunity and
culturally responsive practices to promote each student’s academic success and well-
being.

Effective leaders:
   a) Ensure that each student is treated fairly, respectfully, and with an
       ɸɱɧɨɵɶɷɤɱɧɬɱɪ ɲɩ ɨɤɦɫ ɶɷɸɧɨɱɷ˜ɶ ɦɸɯɷɸɵɨ ɤɱɧ ɦɲɱɷɨɻɷˉ
   b) Recognize, respect, and employ each student˜ɶ ɶɷɵɨɱɪɷɫɶˊ ɧɬɹɨɵɶɬɷɼˊ ɤɱɧ ɦɸɯɷɸɵɨ
       as assets for teaching and learning.
   c) Ensure that each student has equitable access to effective teachers, learning
       opportunities, academic and social support, and other resources necessary for
       success.
   d) Develop student policies and address student misconduct in a positive, fair, and
       unbiased manner.
   e) Confront and alter institutional biases of student marginalization, deficit-based
       schooling, and low expectations associated with race, class, culture and
       language, gender and sexual orientation, and disability or special status.
   f) Promote the preparation of students to live productively in and contribute to the
       diverse cultural contexts of a global society.
   g) Act with cultural competence and responsiveness in their interactions, decision
       making, and practice.
   h) Address matters of equity and cultural responsiveness in all aspects of
       leadership.




                                          27
                           STANDARD 4:
             CURRICULUM, INSTRUCTION, AND ASSESSMENT

Effective educational leaders develop and support intellectually rigorous and
coherent systems of curriculum, instruction, and assessment to promote each
student’s academic success and well-being.

Effective leaders:
   a) Implement coherent systems of curriculum, instruction, and assessment that
       promote the mission, vision, and core values of the school, embody high
       expectations for student learning, align with academic standards, and are
       culturally responsive.
   b) Align and focus systems of curriculum, instruction, and assessment within and
       across grade levels to promote student academic success, love of learning, the
       identities and habits of learners, and healthy sense of self.
   c) Promote instructional practice that is consistent with knowledge of child learning
       and development, effective pedagogy, and the needs of each student.
   d) Ensure instructional practice that is intellectually challenging, authentic to
       student experiences, recognizes student strengths, and is differentiated and
       personalized.
   e) Promote the effective use of technology in the service of teaching and learning.
   f) Employ valid assessments that are consistent with knowledge of child learning
       and development and technical standards of measurement.
   g) Use assessment data appropriately and within technical limitations to monitor
       student progress and improve instruction.




                                           28
                         STANDARD 5:
          COMMUNITY OF CARE AND SUPPORT FOR STUDENTS

Effective educational leaders cultivate an inclusive, caring, and supportive school
community that promotes the academic success and well-being of each student.

Effective leaders:
   a) Build and maintain a safe, caring, and healthy school environment that meets
       that the academic, social, emotional, and physical needs of each student.
   b) Create and sustain a school environment in which each student is known,
       accepted and valued, trusted and respected, cared for, and encouraged to be an
       active and responsible member of the school community.
   c) Provide coherent systems of academic and social supports, services,
       extracurricular activities, and accommodations to meet the range of learning
       needs of each student.
   d) Promote adult-student, student-peer, and school-community relationships that
       value and support academic learning and positive social and emotional
       development.
   e) Cultivate and reinforce student engagement in school and positive student
       conduct.
   f) Iɱɩɸɶɨ ɷɫɨ ɶɦɫɲɲɯ˜ɶ ɯearning environment with the cultures and languages of the
       ɶɦɫɲɲɯ˜ɶ ɦɲɰɰɸɱɬɷɼˉ




                                          29
                          STANDARD 6:
           PROFESSIONAL CAPACITY OF SCHOOL PERSONNEL

Effective educational leaders develop the professional capacity and practice of school
personnel to promote each student’s academic success and well-being.

Effective leaders:
   a) Recruit, hire, support, develop, and retain effective and caring teachers and other
       professional staff and form them into an educationally effective faculty.
   b) Plan for and manage staff turnover and succession, providing opportunities for
       effective induction and mentoring of new personnel.
   c) Dɨɹɨɯɲɳ ɷɨɤɦɫɨɵɶ˜ ɤɱɧ ɶɷɤɩɩ ɰɨɰɥɨɵɶ˜ ɳɵɲɩɨɶɶɬɲɱɤɯ ɮɱɲɺɯɨɧɪɨˊ ɶɮɬɯɯɶˊ ɤɱɧ
       practice through differentiated opportunities for learning and growth, guided by
       understanding of professional and adult learning and development.
   d) Foster continuous improvement of individual and collective instructional
       capacity to achieve outcomes envisioned for each student.
   e) Deliver actionable feedback about instruction and other professional practice
       through valid, research-anchored systems of supervision and evaluation to
       ɶɸɳɳɲɵɷ ɷɫɨ ɧɨɹɨɯɲɳɰɨɱɷ ɲɩ ɷɨɤɦɫɨɵɶ˜ ɤɱɧ ɶɷɤɩɩ ɰɨɰɥɨɵɶ˜ ɮɱɲɺɯɨɧɪɨˊ ɶɮɬɯɯɶˊ ɤɱɧ
       practice.
   f) Empower and motivate teachers and staff to the highest levels of professional
       practice and to continuous learning and improvement.
   g) Develop the capacity, opportunities, and support for teacher leadership and
       leadership from other members of the school community.
   h) Promote the personal and professional health, well-being, and work-life balance
       of faculty and staff.
   i) Tend to their own learning and effectiveness through reflection, study, and
       improvement, maintaining a healthy work-life balance.




                                           30
                        STANDARD 7:
        PROFESSIONAL COMMUNITY FOR TEACHERS AND STAFF


Effective educational leaders foster a professional community of teachers and other
professional staff to promote each student’s academic success and well-being.

Effective leaders:
   a) Develop workplace conditions for teachers and other professional staff that
       promote effective professional development, practice, and student learning.
   b) Empower and entrust teachers and staff with collective responsibility for
       meeting the academic, social, emotional, and physical needs of each student,
       pursuant to the mission, vision, and core values of the school.
   c) Establish and sustain a professional culture of engagement and commitment to
       shared vision, goals, and objectives pertaining to the education of the whole
       child; high expectations for professional work; ethical and equitable practice;
       trust and open communication; collaboration, collective efficacy, and continuous
       individual and organizational learning and improvement.
   d) Promote mutual accountability among teachers and other professional staff for
       ɨɤɦɫ ɶɷɸɧɨɱɷ˜ɶ ɶɸɦɦɨɶɶ ɤɱɧ ɷɫɨ ɨɩɩɨɦɷɬɹɨɱɨɶɶ ɲɩ ɷɫɨ ɶɦɫɲɲɯ ɤɶ ɤ whole.
   e) Develop and support open, productive, caring, and trusting working
       relationships among leaders, faculty, and staff to promote professional capacity
       and the improvement of practice.
   f) Design and implement job-embedded and other opportunities for professional
       learning collaboratively with faculty and staff.
   g) Provide opportunities for collaborative examination of practice, collegial
       feedback, and collective learning.
   h) Encourage faculty-initiated improvement of programs and practices.




                                          31
                      STANDARD 8:
     MEANINGFUL ENGAGEMENT OF FAMILIES AND COMMUNITY


Effective educational leaders engage families and the community in meaningful,
reciprocal, and mutually beneficial ways to promote each student’s academic success
and well-being.

Effective leaders:
   a) Are approachable, accessible, and welcoming to families and members of the
       community.
   b) Create and sustain positive, collaborative, and productive relationships with
       families and the community for the benefit of students.
   c) Engage in regular and open two-way communication with families and the
       community about the school, students, needs, problems, and accomplishments.
   d) Maintain a presence in the community to understand its strengths and needs,
       develop productive relationships, and engage its resources for the school.
   e) Create means for the school community to partner with families to support
       student learning in and out of school.
   f) Uɱɧɨɵɶɷɤɱɧˊ ɹɤɯɸɨˊ ɤɱɧ ɨɰɳɯɲɼ ɷɫɨ ɦɲɰɰɸɱɬɷɼ˜ɶ ɦɸɯɷɸɵɤɯˊ ɶɲɦɬɤɯˊ ɬɱɷɨɯɯɨɦɷɸɤɯˊ
       and political resources to promote student learning and school improvement.
   g) Develop and provide the school as a resource for families and the community.
   h) Advocate for the school and district, and for the importance of education and
       student needs and priorities to families and the community.
   i) Advocate publicly for the needs and priorities of students, families, and the
       community.
   j) Build and sustain productive partnerships with public and private sectors to
       promote school improvement and student learning.




                                         32
                               STANDARD 9:
                       OPERATIONS AND MANAGEMENT


Effective educational leaders manage school operations and resources to promote
each student’s academic success and well-being.

Effective leaders:
   a) Institute, manage, and monitor operations and administrative systems that
       promote the mission and vision of the school.
   b) Strategically manage staff resources, assigning and scheduling teachers and staff
       to roles and responsibilities that optimize their professional capacity to address
       ɨɤɦɫ ɶɷɸɧɨɱɷ˜ɶ ɯɨɤɵɱɬɱɪ ɱɨɨɧɶˉ
   c) Seek, acquire, and manage fiscal, physical, and other resources to support
       curriculum, instruction, and assessment; student learning community;
       professional capacity and community; and family and community engagement.
   d) Aɵɨ ɵɨɶɳɲɱɶɬɥɯɨˊ ɨɷɫɬɦɤɯˊ ɤɱɧ ɤɦɦɲɸɱɷɤɥɯɨ ɶɷɨɺɤɵɧɶ ɲɩ ɷɫɨ ɶɦɫɲɲɯ˜ɶ ɰɲɱɨɷɤɵɼ ɤɱɧ
       non- monetary resources, engaging in effective budgeting and accounting
       practices.
   e) Pɵɲɷɨɦɷ ɷɨɤɦɫɨɵɶ˜ ɤɱɧ ɲɷɫɨɵ ɶɷɤɩɩ ɰɨɰɥɨɵɶ˜ ɺɲɵɮ ɤɱɧ ɯɨɤɵɱɬɱɪ ɩɵɲɰ ɧɬɶɵɸɳɷɬɲɱˉ
   f) Employ technology to improve the quality and efficiency of operations and
       management.
   g) Develop and maintain data and communication systems to deliver actionable
       information for classroom and school improvement.
   h) Know, comply with, and help the school community understand local, state, and
       federal laws, rights, policies, and regulations so as to promote student success.
   i) Develop and manage relationships with feeder and connecting schools for
       enrollment management and curricular and instructional articulation.
   j) Develop and manage productive relationships with the central office and school
       board.
   k) Develop and administer systems for fair and equitable management of conflict
       among students, faculty and staff, leaders, families, and community.
   l) Manage governance processes and internal and external politics toward
       ɤɦɫɬɨɹɬɱɪ ɷɫɨ ɶɦɫɲɲɯ˜ɶ ɰɬɶɶɬɲɱ ɤɱɧ ɹɬɶɬɲɱˉ




                                           33
                               STANDARD 10:
                            SCHOOL IMPROVEMENT


Effective educational leaders act as agents of continuous improvement to promote
each student’s academic success and well-being.

Effective leaders:
   a) Seek to make school more effective for each student, teachers and staff, families,
       and the community.
   b) Use methods of continuous improvement to achieve the vision, fulfill the
       mission, and promote the core values of the school.
   c) Prepare the school and the community for improvement, promoting readiness,
       an imperative for improvement, instilling mutual commitment and
       accountability, and developing the knowledge, skills, and motivation to succeed
       in improvement.
   d) Engage others in an ongoing process of evidence-based inquiry, learning,
       strategic goal setting, planning, implementation, and evaluation for continuous
       school and classroom improvement.
   e) Employ situationally-appropriate strategies for improvement, including
       transformational and incremental, adaptive approaches and attention to different
       phases of implementation.
   f) Assess and develop the capacity of staff to assess the value and applicability of
       emerging educational trends and the findings of research for the school and its
       improvement.
   g) Develop technically appropriate systems of data collection, management,
       analysis, and use, connecting as needed to the district office and external
       partners for support in planning, implementation, monitoring, feedback, and
       evaluation.
   h) Adopt a systems perspective and promote coherence among improvement
       efforts and all aspects of school organization, programs, and services.
   i) Manage uncertainty, risk, competing initiatives, and politics of change with
       courage and perseverance, providing support and encouragement, and openly
       communicating the need for, process for, and outcomes of improvement efforts.
   j) Develop and promote leadership among teachers and staff for inquiry,
       experimentation and innovation, and initiating and implementing improvement




                                           34
Bibliography
Jobs for the Future & the Council of Chief State school Officers. 2017. Leadership
      Competencies For Learner-Centered, Personalized Education. Boston, MA: Jobs for the
      Future
National Policy Board for Educational Administration (2015). Professional Standards for
       Educational Leaders 2015. Reston, VA: Author
Vermont Standards Board for Professional Educators (VSBPE). (2010). Definition of an
       Effective Teacher and School Leader. Montpelier, VT.




                                           35
CODE OF PROFESSIONAL
ETHICS AND
RULES OF PROFESSIONAL
CONDUCT FOR VERMONT
EDUCATORS
Adopted by the VSBPE on April 15, 2009
Revised and adopted by the VSBPE on June 5, 2018.




                                     36
INTRODUCTION
Act 214 of the 2006 Vermont legislative session mandated that the VSBPE develop a code of
professional ethics and act as advisors regarding its interpretation. The first Code of Ethics for
Vermont educators was adopted in April, 2009. The Model Code of Ethics for Vermont
Educators and Rules of Professional Conduct for Vermont Educators that follow are meant to
ensure that our educators demonstrate the highest professional conduct and care for our
learners.

                                                                          The public vests educators
In May 2018, the VSBPE adopted the NASDTEC Model Code of
                                                                          with trust and responsibility
Ethics for Educators. The VSBPE reviewed its current code of ethics
                                                                          for educating the children of
ɺɬɷɫ ɷɫɤɷ ɲɩ NASDTEC˜ɶ ɷɲ ɤɶɶɸɵɨ ɬɷɶ ɶɷɤɱɧɤɵɧɶ ɺɨɵɨ ɤɯɬɪɱɨɧ ɺɬɷɫ
                                                                          Vermont.
current practices from across the country.


Licensing Hearing Panels

Act 214 also required the establishment of a Licensing Hearing Panel (LHP). The LHP is a 14-
member teacher majority board that determines compliance with these standards to help assure
high caliber professionals and high quality public educational programs for Vermont students.

References

NASDTEC, Model Code of Ethics for Educators, June 25, 2015.
Retrieved from www.nasdtec.net




                                                 37
5510 Code of Professional Ethics

       The essential qualities of the competent and caring educator include moral integrity,
       humane attitudes, reflective practice, and a sound understanding of academic content
       and pedagogy. The public vests educators with trust and responsibility for educating the
       children of Vermont. We believe that fulfilling this charge requires educators to
       demonstrate the highest standards of professional conduct.

       We, as professional educators, respect the dignity and individuality of every human
       being. We are committed to, and model for our students, the lifelong pursuit of learning
       and academic excellence.

       We are dedicated to effective scholarly practice, further enhanced by collaboration with
       colleagues and with those in the greater educational community. Furthermore, we are
       dedicated to compassionate service on behalf of our learners and their families, and we
       advocate for them in the school and community settings.

       We recognize and accept both the public trust and the magnitude of responsibility
       inherent in our profession. To this end, we put forth these rules of conduct as the
       foundation for professional practice for all Vermont educators to honor and follow.


5520 Rules of Professional Conduct

       What follows is a statement of fundamental principles which all Vermont educators
       should follow, each of which is accompanied by an enumeration of examples of
       unprofessional conduct which could subject an educator to licensing action.




                                              38
Principle I: Responsibility to the Profession

The professional educator is aware that trust in the profession depends upon a level of
professional conduct and responsibility that may be higher than required by law. This entails
holding one and other educators to the same ethical standards.
The professional educator demonstrates responsibility to oneself as an ethical professional by:
    1. Acknowledging that lack of awareness, knowledge, or understanding of the Code is not,
        in itself, a defense to a charge of unethical conduct;
    2. Knowing and upholding the procedures, policies, laws and regulations relevant to
        professional practice regardless of personal views;
    3. Holding oneself responsible for ethical conduct;
    4. Monitoring and maintaining sound mental, physical, and emotional health necessary to
        perform duties and services of any professional assignment; and taking appropriate
        measures when personal or health-related issues may interfere with work-related duties;
    5. Rɨɩɵɤɬɱɬɱɪ ɩɵɲɰ ɳɵɲɩɨɶɶɬɲɱɤɯ ɲɵ ɳɨɵɶɲɱɤɯ ɤɦɷɬɹɬɷɼ ɷɫɤɷ ɰɤɼ ɯɨɤɧ ɷɲ ɵɨɧɸɦɬɱɪ ɲɱɨ˜ɶ 1
        effectiveness within the school community;
    6. Aɹɲɬɧɬɱɪ ɷɫɨ ɸɶɨ ɲɩ ɲɱɨ˜ɶ ɳɲɶɬɷɬɲɱ ɩɲɵ ɳɨɵɶɲɱɤɯ ɪɤɬɱ ɤɱɧ ɤɹɲɬɧɬɱɪ ɷɫɨ ɤɳɳɨɤɵɤɱɦɨ ɲɩ
        impropriety;
    7. Taking responsibility and credit only for work actually performed or produced, and
       acknowledging the work and contributions made by others.
B. The professional educator fulfills the obligation to address and attempt to resolve ethical issues by:
   1. Confronting and taking reasonable steps to resolve conflicts between the Code and the
        implicit or explicit demands of a person or organization;
    2. Maintaining fidelity to the Code by taking proactive steps when having reason to believe
        that another educator may be approaching or involved in an ethically compromising
        situation;
    3. Neither discriminating nor retaliating against a person on the basis of having made an
        ethical complaint;
    4. Neither filing nor encouraging frivolous ethical complaints solely to harm or retaliate.
    5. Cooperating fully during ethics investigations and proceedings



C. The professional educator promotes and advances the profession within and beyond the school
community by:
    1. Influencing and supporting decisions and actions that positively impact teaching and
        learning, educational leadership and student services;

                                                     39
    2. Engaging in respectful discourse regarding issues that impact the profession;
    3. Eɱɫɤɱɦɬɱɪ ɲɱɨ˜ɶ ɳɵɲɩɨɶɶɬɲɱɤɯ ɨɩɩɨɦɷɬɹɨɱɨɶɶ ɥɼ ɶɷɤɼɬɱɪ ɦɸɵɵɨɱɷ ɺɬɷɫ ɨɷɫɬɦɤɯ ɳɵɬɱɦɬɳɯɨɶ ɤɱɧ
        decisions from relevant sources including professional organizations;
    4. Actively participating in educational and professional organizations and associations;
        and
    5. Advocating for adequate resources and facilities to ensure equitable opportunities for all
        students.

Principle II: Responsibility for Professional Competence
The professional educator is committed to the highest levels of professional and ethical practice,
including demonstration of the knowledge, skills and dispositions required for professional
competence.
A. The professional educator demonstrates commitment to high standards of practice through:
    1. Iɱɦɲɵɳɲɵɤɷɬɱɪ ɬɱɷɲ ɲɱɨ˜ɶ ɳɵɤɦɷɬɦɨ ɶɷɤɷɨ ɤɱɧ ɱɤɷɬɲɱɤɯ ɶɷɤɱɧɤɵɧɶˊ ɬɱɦɯɸɧɬɱɪ ɷɫɲɶɨ ɶɳɨɦɬɩɬɦ ɷɲ
        ɲɱɨ˜ɶ ɧɬɶɦɬɳɯɬɱɨˌ
    2. Using the Model Code of Educator Ethics and other ethicɶ ɦɲɧɨɶ ɸɱɬɴɸɨ ɷɲ ɲɱɨ˜ɶ ɧɬɶɦɬɳɯɬɱɨ
        to guide and frame educational decision-making;
    3. Advocating for equitable educational opportunities for all students;
    4. Accepting the responsibilities, performing duties and providing services corresponding
        to the area of cɨɵɷɬɩɬɦɤɷɬɲɱˊ ɯɬɦɨɱɶɸɵɨˊ ɤɱɧ ɷɵɤɬɱɬɱɪ ɲɩ ɲɱɨ˜ɶ ɳɲɶɬɷɬɲɱˌ
    5. Rɨɩɯɨɦɷɬɱɪ ɸɳɲɱ ɤɱɧ ɤɶɶɨɶɶɬɱɪ ɲɱɨ˜ɶ ɳɵɲɩɨɶɶɬɲɱɤɯ ɶɮɬɯɯɶˊ ɦɲɱɷɨɱɷ ɮɱɲɺɯɨɧɪɨˊ ɤɱɧ
        competency on an ongoing basis; and
    6. Committing to ongoing professional learning.

B. The professional educator demonstrates responsible use of data, materials, research and assessment by:
    1. Aɳɳɵɲɳɵɬɤɷɨɯɼ ɵɨɦɲɪɱɬɽɬɱɪ ɲɷɫɨɵɶ˜ ɺɲɵɮ ɥɼ ɦɬɷɬɱɪ ɧɤɷɤ ɲɵ ɰɤɷɨɵɬɤɯɶ ɩɵɲɰ ɳɸɥɯɬɶɫɨɧˊ
        unpublished, or electronic sources when disseminating information;
    2. Using developmentally appropriate assessments for the purposes for which they are
        intended and for which they have been validated to guide educational decisions;
    3. Conducting research in an ethical and responsible manner with appropriate permission
        and supervision;
    4. Seeking and using evidence, instructional data, research, and professional knowledge to
        inform practice;
    5. Creating, maintaining, disseminating, storing, retaining and disposing of records and
        ɧɤɷɤ ɵɨɯɤɷɬɱɪ ɷɲ ɲɱɨ˜ɶ ɵɨɶɨɤɵɦɫ ɤɱɧ ɳɵɤɦɷɬɦɨˊ ɬɱ ɤɦɦɲɵɧɤɱɦɨ ɺɬɷɫ ɧɬɶɷɵɬɦɷ ɳɲɯɬɦɼˊ ɶɷɤɷɨ ɤɱd
        federal laws; and
    6. Using data, data sources, or findings accurately and reliably.

C. The professional educator acts in the best interest of all students by:
    1. Iɱɦɵɨɤɶɬɱɪ ɶɷɸɧɨɱɷɶ˜ ɤɦɦɨɶɶ ɷɲ ɷɫɨ ɦɸɵɵɬɦɸɯɸɰˊ ɤɦɷɬɹɬɷɬɨɶˊ ɤɱɧ ɵɨɶɲɸɵɦɨɶ ɬɱ ɲɵɧɨɵ ɷɲ
        provide a quality and equitable educational experience.



                                                   40
   2. Working to engage the school community to close achievement, opportunity, and
       attainment gaps; and
   3. Protecting students from any practice that harms or has the potential to harm students.

Principle III: Responsibility to Students
The professional educator has a primary obligation to treat students with dignity and respect.
The professional educator promotes the health, safety and well being of students by
establishing and maintaining appropriate verbal, physical, emotional and social boundaries.
A. The professional educator respects the rights and dignity of students by:
    1. Respecting students by taking into account their age, gender, culture, setting and
       socioeconomic context;
   2. Interacting with students with transparency and in appropriate settings;
   3. Communicating with students in a clear, respectful, and culturally sensitive manner;
   4. Tɤɮɬɱɪ ɬɱɷɲ ɤɦɦɲɸɱɷ ɫɲɺ ɤɳɳɨɤɵɤɱɦɨ ɤɱɧ ɧɵɨɶɶ ɦɤɱ ɤɩɩɨɦɷ ɲɱɨ˜ɶ ɬɱɷɨɵɤɦɷɬɲɱɶ ɤɱɧ
       relationships with students;
   5. Considering the implication of accepting gifts from or giving gifts to students;
   6. Engaging in physical contact with students only when there is a clearly defined purpose
       that benefits the student and continually keeps the safety and well-being of the student
       in mind;
   7. Avoiding multiple relationships with students which might impair objectivity and
       increase the risk of harm to student learning or well-being or decrease educator
       effectiveness;
   8. Acknowledging that there are no circumstances that allow for educators to engage in
       romantic or sexual relationships with students; and
   9. Considering the ramifications of entering into an adult relationship of any kind with a
       former student, including but not limited to, any potential harm to the former student,
       public perception, and the ɳɲɶɶɬɥɯɨ ɬɰɳɤɦɷ ɲɱ ɷɫɨ ɨɧɸɦɤɷɲɵ˜ɶ ɦɤɵɨɨɵˉ Tɫɨ ɳɵɲɩɨɶɶɬɲɱɤɯ
       educator ensures that the adult relationship was not started while the former student
       was in school.

B. The professional educator demonstrates an ethic of care through:
    1. Seeking to understand studeɱɷɶ˜ ɨɧɸɦɤɷɬɲɱɤɯˊ ɤɦɤɧɨɰɬɦˊ ɳɨɵɶɲɱɤɯ ɤɱɧ ɶɲɦɬɤɯ ɱɨɨɧɶ ɤɶ
       ɺɨɯɯ ɤɶ ɶɷɸɧɨɱɷɶ˜ ɹɤɯɸɨɶˊ ɥɨɯɬɨɩɶˊ ɤɱɧ ɦɸɯɷɸɵɤɯ ɥɤɦɮɪɵɲɸɱɧˌ
   2. Respecting the dignity, worth, and uniqueness of each individual student including, but
       not limited to, actual and perceived gender, gender expression, gender identity, civil
       status, family status, sexual orientation, religion, age, disability, race, ethnicity, socio-
       economic status, and culture; and
   3. Establishing and maintaining an environment that promotes the emotional, intellectual,
      physical, and sexual safety of all students.

C. The professional educator maintains student trust and confidentiality when interacting with students
   in a developmentally appropriate manner and within appropriate limits by:


                                                  41
    1. Respecting the privacy of students and the need to hold in confidence certain forms of
        student communication, documents, or information obtained in the course of
        professional practice;
    2. Uɳɫɲɯɧɬɱɪ ɳɤɵɨɱɷɶ˜/ɪɸɤɵɧɬɤɱɶ˜ ɯɨɪɤɯ ɵɬɪɫɷɶˊ ɤɶ ɺɨɯɯ ɤɶ ɤɱɼ ɯɨɪɤɯ ɵɨɴɸɬɵɨɰɨɱɷɶ ɷɲ ɵɨɹɨɤɯ
        information related to legitimate concerns for the well-being of a student; and
    3. Protecting the confidentiality of student records and releasing personal data in
        accordance with prescribed state and federal laws and local policies.

Principle IV: Responsibility to the School Community
The professional educator promotes positive relationships and effective interactions, with
members of the school community, while maintaining professional boundaries.
A. The professional educator promotes effective and appropriate relationships with parents/guardians by:

    1. Communicating with parents/guardians in a timely and respectful manner that
        ɵɨɳɵɨɶɨɱɷɶ ɷɫɨ ɶɷɸɧɨɱɷɶ˜ ɥɨɶɷ ɬɱɷɨɵɨɶɷɶˌ
    2. Demonstrating a commitment to equality, equity, and inclusion as well as respecting
        and accommodating diversity among members of the school community;
    3. Considering the implication of accepting gifts from or giving gifts to parents/guardians;
        and
    4. Maintaining appropriate confidentiality with respect to student information disclosed
       by or to parents/guardians unless required by law.

B. The professional educator promotes effective and appropriate relationships with colleagues by:

    1. Respecting colleagues as fellow professionals and maintaining civility when differences
       arise;
    2. Resolving conflicts, whenever possible, privately and respectfully and in accordance
       with district policy;
    3. Keeping student safety, education, and health paramount by maintaining and sharing
       educational records appropriately and objectively in accordance with local policies and
       state and federal laws;
    4. Collaborating with colleagues in a manner that supports academic achievement and
       related goals that promote the best interests of students;
    5. Enhancing the professional growth and development of new educators by supporting
        effective field experiences, mentoring or induction activities across the career
        continuum;
    6. Ensuring that educators who are assigned to participate as mentors for new educators,
        cooperating teachers, or other teacher leadership positions are prepared and supervised
        to assume these roles;
    7. Ensuring that educators are assigned to positions in accordance with their educational
        credentials, preparation, and experience in order to maxɬɰɬɽɨ ɶɷɸɧɨɱɷɶ˜ ɲɳɳɲɵɷɸɱɬɷɬɨɶ
        and achievement; and

                                                    42
    8. Working to ensure a workplace environment that is free from harassment.


C. The professional educator promotes effective and appropriate relationships with the community and
other stakeholders by:

    1. Advocating for policies and laws that the educator supports as promoting the education
        and well-being of students and families;
    2. Collaborating with community agencies, organizations, and individuals in order to
        ɤɧɹɤɱɦɨ ɶɷɸɧɨɱɷɶ˜ ɥɨɶɷ ɬɱɷɨɵɨɶɷɶ ɺɬɷɫɲɸɷ ɵɨɪɤɵd to personal reward or remuneration;
        and
    3. Maintaining the highest professional standards of accuracy, honesty, and appropriate
        disclosure of information when representing the school or district within the community
        and in public communications.

D. The professional educator promotes effective and appropriate relationships with employers by:

    1. Using property, facilities, materials, and resources in accordance with local policies and
        state and federal laws;
    2. Respecting intellectual property ownership rights (e.g. original lesson plans, district
        level curricula, syllabi, gradebooks, etc.) when sharing materials;
    3. Exhibiting personal and professional conduct that is in the best interest of the
        organization, learning community, school community, and profession; and
    4. Considering the implications of offering or accepting gifts and/or preferential treatment
        by vendors or an individual in a position of professional influence or power.

E. The professional educator understands the problematic nature of multiple relationships by:

    1. Considering the risks that multiple relationships might impair objectivity and increase
        ɷɫɨ ɯɬɮɨɯɬɫɲɲɧ ɲɩ ɫɤɵɰ ɷɲ ɶɷɸɧɨɱɷɶ˜ ɯɨɤɵɱɬɱɪ ɤɱɧ ɺɨɯɯ-being or diminish educator
        effectiveness;
    2. Considering the risks and benefits of a professional relationship with someone with
        whom the educator has had a past personal relationship and vice versa;
    3. Considering the implications and possible ramifications of engaging in a personal or
        professional relationship with parents and guardians, student teachers, colleagues, and
        supervisors; and
    4. Ensuring that professional responsibilities to paraprofessionals, student teachers or
        interns do not interfere with responsibilities to students, their learning, and well-being.

Principle V: Responsible and Ethical Use of Technology
The professional educator considers the impact of consuming, creating, distributing and
communicating information through all technologies. The ethical educator is vigilant to ensure



                                                   43
appropriate boundaries of time, place and role are maintained when using electronic
communication.
A. The professional educator uses technology in a responsible manner by:
    1. Using social media responsibly, transparently, and primarily for purposes of teaching
        and learning per school and district policy. The professional educator considers the
        ɵɤɰɬɩɬɦɤɷɬɲɱɶ ɲɩ ɸɶɬɱɪ ɶɲɦɬɤɯ ɰɨɧɬɤ ɤɱɧ ɧɬɵɨɦɷ ɦɲɰɰɸɱɬɦɤɷɬɲɱ ɹɬɤ ɷɨɦɫɱɲɯɲɪɼ ɲɱ ɲɱɨ˜ɶ
        interactions with students, colleagues, and the general public;
    2. Staying abreast of current trends and uses of school technology;
    3. Promoting the benefits of and clarifying the limitations of various appropriate
       technological applications with colleagues, appropriate school personnel, parents, and
       community members;
    4. Knowing how to access, document and use proprietary materials and understanding
        how to recognize and prevent plagiarism by students and educators;
    5. Uɱɧɨɵɶɷɤɱɧɬɱɪ ɤɱɧ ɤɥɬɧɬɱɪ ɥɼ ɷɫɨ ɧɬɶɷɵɬɦɷ˜ɶ ɳɲɯɬɦɼ ɲɱ ɷɫɨ ɸɶɨ ɲɩ ɷɨɦɫɱɲɯɲɪɼ ɤɱɧ
        communication;
    6. Recognizing that some electronic communications are records under the Freedom of
        Information Act (FOIA) and state public access laws and should consider the
        implications of sharing sensitive information electronically either via professional or
        personal devices/accounts; and
    7. Exercising prudence in maintaining separate and professional virtual profiles, keeping
        personal and professional lives distinct.

B. The professional educator ensures students’ safety and well-being when using technology by:

    1. Being vigilant in identifying, addressing and reporting (when appropriate and in
        accordance with local district, state, and federal policy) inappropriate and illegal
        materials/images in electronic or other forms;
    2. Rɨɶɳɨɦɷɬɱɪ ɷɫɨ ɳɵɬɹɤɦɼ ɲɩ ɶɷɸɧɨɱɷɶ˜ ɳɵɨɶɨɱɦɨ ɲɱ ɶɲɦɬɤɯ ɰɨɧɬɤ ɸɱɯɨɶɶ ɪɬɹɨɱ ɦɲɱɶɨɱɷ ɷɲ
        view such information or if there is a possibility of evidence of a risk of harm to the
        student or others; and
    3. Monitoring to the extent practical and appropriately reporting information concerning
        possible cyber bullying incidents and their potential impact on the student learning
        environment.

C. The professional educator maintains confidentiality in the use of technology by:

    1. Taking appropriate and reasonable measures to maintain confidentiality of student
        information and educational records stored or transmitted through the use of electronic
        or computer technology;
    2. Understanding the intent of Federal Educational Rights to Privacy Act (FERPA) and
        how it applies to sharing electronic student records; and


                                                    44
    3. Ensuring that the rights of third parties, including the right of privacy, are not violated
        via the use of technologies.

D. The professional educator promotes the appropriate use of technology in educational settings by:

    1. Advocating for equal access to technology for all students, especially those historically
        underserved;
    2. Promoting the benefits of and clarifying the limitations of various appropriate
        technological applications with colleagues, appropriate school personnel, parents, and
        community members; and
    3. Pɵɲɰɲɷɬɱɪ ɷɨɦɫɱɲɯɲɪɬɦɤɯ ɤɳɳɯɬɦɤɷɬɲɱɶ ˕ɤ˖ ɷɫɤɷ ɤɵɨ ɤɳɳɵɲɳɵɬɤɷɨ ɩɲɵ ɶɷɸɧɨɱɷɶ˜ ɬɱɧɬɹɬɧɸɤɯ
        needs, (b) that students understand how to use and (c) that assist and enhance the
        teaching and learning process.




Application Notes:
1. The foregoing Model Code of Ethics is adopted in accordance with 16 V.S.A. § 1694(5).

2. Nothing in these Rules can, or is inɷɨɱɧɨɧ ɷɲˊ ɹɤɵɼ ɷɫɨ ɧɨɩɬɱɬɷɬɲɱ ɲɩ ȃɸɱɳɵɲɩɨɶɶɬɲɱɤɯ ɦɲɱɧɸɦɷȄ
which is contained in 16 V.S.A. § 1698. Rather, these Rules enumerate a non-exclusive list of
conduct which, if proven in a particular case, might constitute unprofessional conduct.




                                                   45
                                                        Glossary
Boundaries:
The verbal, physical, emotional and social distances that an educator must maintain in order to
ensure structure, security, and predictability in an educational environment. Most often, the
boundaries that are transgressed relate to role, time and place. By respecting contracted roles,
appropriate working hours, and the location of the learning environment, secure boundaries are
in place for all members of the schooling community.

District/school district:
Tɫɬɶ ɬɶ ɲɩɷɨɱ ɵɨɩɨɵɵɨɧ ɷɲ ɤɶ ɤ ȃɯɲɦɤɯ ɨɧɸɦɤɷɬɲɱ ɤɪɨɱɦɼˉȄ A ȃɧɬɶɷɵɬɦɷȄ ɬɱ ɷɫɬɶ ɧɲɦɸɰɨɱɷ ɬɶ ɧɨɩɬɱɨɧ
as a public board of education or other public authority legally constituted within a State for
either administrative control or direction of, or to perform a service function for, public
elementary schools or secondary schools in a city, county, township, school district, or other
political subdivision of a State, or for a combination of school districts or counties that is
recognized in a State as an administrative agency for its public elementary schools or secondary
schools. This can include charter schools, magnet schools, virtual magnet schools, regional
educational school districts, or other entities falling under the definition above.

Culture:
The customary beliefs, social forms, and material traits of a racial, religious, or social group,
including the characteristic features of everyday existence shared by people in a place or time3.

Educator:
Educators are the target audience for the MCEE, and are defined as licensed educators. These
include paraprofessionals, teachers, teacher leaders, student support personnel and
administrators. However, others who interact with students who are not under the auspices of
an education-related licensing organization such as coaches, school secretaries, custodians or
other school staff are encouraged to adopt or adapt this Model Code of Educator Ethics. See a
ɶɨɳɤɵɤɷɨ ɧɨɩɬɱɬɷɬɲɱ ɩɲɵ ȃɳɵɲɩɨɶɶɬɲɱɤɯ ɨɧɸɦɤɷɲɵˉȄ

Ethic of care:
Responding with compassion to the needs of students.

Ethical Decision-Making Model:
A framework utilized by educators to guide decision-making which includes professional
dispositions; applicable laws, statutes, and policies; the Model Code of Educator Ethics; and other
guidelines that have been adopted and endorsed by educational organizations.

Fiduciary relationship:
A fiduciary relationship is one in which a person justifiably places confidence in another whose
aid, advice, or protection is assumed. Inherent in such fiduciary relationships is an imbalance
of power. Educators have a unique responsibility, as the relationship between student and


1
    http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/culture




                                                         46
teacher differs from other professional/client relationships (e.g., attorneys, physicians, clergy).
Educators are entrusted with the safety and welfare of students during and after school hours
ɤɱɧ ɶɨɵɹɨ ȃɬɱ ɯɲɦɲ ɳɤɵɨɱɷɬɶˉȄ

Implicit or Explicit Demands of an Organization:
Implicit demands are often subjective or implied and reflect the culture of the schooling
environment. Explicit demands are clearly articulated through mandates, policies, or statutes.

Harm:
The impairment of learning or any potential action which may lead to physical, emotional,
psychological, sexual, or intellectual damage to a student or a member of the school
community.

Learning Community:
A group of educators who work with one another to achieve the shared goals of their school
and engage in collaborative professional learning to strengthen practice and increase student
results. 24




Multiple Relationships:
Multiple relationships occur when the educator is in a professional role with one or more
members of the school community and also has a personal relationship with that person or a
ɰɨɰɥɨɵ ɲɩ ɷɫɤɷ ɳɨɵɶɲɱ˜ɶ ɩɤɰɬɯɼˉ Mɸɯɷɬɳɯɨ ɵɨɯɤɷɬɲɱɶhips have the potential to impair objectivity,
competence, or effectiveness in performing his or her functions as an educator.

New Educators:
New educators include individuals in an educator preparation program or newly employed in
the education profession, including paraprofessionals, teachers, administrators, and student
support personnel.

Professional educator:
A licensed educator who demonstrates the highest standards of ethical and professionally
competent practice and is committed to advancing the interests, achievement and well-being of
students. The professional educator is also committed to supporting the school community and
the education profession.

Proprietary materials:
Materials that protected from unauthorized use by copyright or other forms of intellectual
property rights.

Safe environments/Safety and well-being:
A school setting which promotes the well-being of all members of the school community and is
characterized by the absence of physical, psychological, sexual or emotional harm



2
    http://learningforward.org/standards/learning-communities#.VTVerkv7Q3Y
3
    http://edglossary.org/school-community/

                                                       47
School Community:
This term usually refers to those stakeholders invested in the welfare of a school and its
community. A school community includes school administrators, teachers, school staff
members, students, their parents and families, school board members and other community
members.5

Sensitive Information:
This includes but is not limited to student information and educational records, including
medical or counseling records.

Student:
A learner attending a P-12 school.

Technology:
Tools, systems, applications and processes that can include, but are not limited to, electronic
communications networks such as the internet and electronic devices such as computers,
laptops, phones and other hardware/software that deliver text, audio, images, animation, and
streaming video.

Transparency:
Oɳɨɱɱɨɶɶ ɤɱɧ ɤɦɦɲɸɱɷɤɥɬɯɬɷɼ ɺɬɷɫ ɵɨɶɳɨɦɷ ɷɲ ɲɱɨ˜ɶ ɥɨɫɤɹɬɲɵɶˊ ɤɦɷions and communications as an
educator.




Revised June 5, 2018

                                               48
