126CSR142

environment and student learning.

13.2. Student Growth. Teachers shall be evaluated based on demonstration of their students’ success
through multiple measures which determine 20 percent of the summative evaluation rating as
determined by the results of the teacher’s student learning goals.

13.3. Professional Conduct. The Professional Conduct standard allows educators to address areas of
concern without necessitating an improvement plan. The Professional Conduct performance standard
does not, however, supplant code and policy to which educators remain fully accountable and is not
determinative of whether behavior is correctable. Certain violations may be corrected by implementation
of an improvement plan; others will require immediate action. The standard addresses the following
areas: Adhering to Policy and Procedure; Professional Attendance; Adhering to Schedule; and Respect.
An Unsatisfactory rating in any of these areas prompts a standard performance rating of Unsatisfactory.

§126-142-14. Evaluation Process for School Counselors.

14.1. All school counselors shall participate in an annual evaluation conference on or before June 15
that is recorded in the online evaluation system.

14.2. The evaluator is responsible for monitoring performance and for preparing the online
evaluation. When school counselors are in multiple schools, school counselors will consult with the
county superintendent and the school leader at their home school to identify their evaluator(s).

14.3. The purpose of the evaluation is to set high standards of performance for school counselors,
ensure high-quality instruction focused on increasing student achievement, and encourage continuous
growth and improvement through personal reflection and goal setting.

14.4. School counselors annually develop two goals targeted at performance improvement and
submit them electronically to their evaluator for review on or before November 1. Evaluators may request
goals be modified. Goals account for 15 percent of a school counselor’s annual evaluation.

14.5. School counselors may submit evidence for each goal to validate progress of student impact
and briefly describe results on both goals. Evaluators review results and record a performance level for
the goals.

14.6. Observations may be requested by the school counselor or the evaluator at any time for
activities of a non-confidential nature. The evaluator shall conduct requested observations within a
timeframe established through communication between the school counselor and the evaluator.

14.7. The school counselor’s signature in the online system denotes that the evaluator has reviewed
the evaluation with the school counselor. The school counselor’s signature does not imply concurrence
with the evaluation and/or its rating. The school counselor has the right to include a statement as an
addendum to the evaluation. An addendum and the signature of the school counselor must be submitted
no later than five working days following the date of the conference.

§126-142-15. School Counselor Evaluation Standards and Elements.

15.1. The following elements describe important competencies of effective school counselors based
on observable behaviors and artifacts of practice. These elements reflect best practices as illustrated in

13
