126CSR142

4.19.c. Professional Conduct Standard. Standard that sets clear criteria for those competencies
and habits of mind without which professional teaching simply cannot occur.

4.20. Self-Reflection. A tool for educators to assess their professional practice as it relates to
standards contained in the West Virginia Evaluation System and to assist in the development of personal
professional learning goals.

4.21. Student Impact Goal. A goal that requires school counselors to document student changes as
an outcome of the school counseling program. The school counselor, in collaboration with the school
leader, sets a student impact goal in an identified area of need.

4.22. Summative Evaluation. The final annual assessment that measures levels of educator
professional growth based on performance standard ratings and goals as documented in the online
educator evaluation system.

4.23. Summative Rating. The summative rating for performance established by the educator
evaluation process which will determine the overall performance level of the educator based upon
performance and student growth. If the evaluation indicates any performance level is less than
accomplished, an explanation and data to support the evaluation are required.

4.24. Teacher of Record. The educator responsible for a significant portion of a student’s instructional
time.

4.25. Two Pointsin Time. Timeline established by the teacher in consultation with the principal when
developing student learning goals.

4.26. West Virginia Educator Evaluation System. A statewide system for assessing educator
performance using the Teacher Evaluation Standards and Elements, student growth, and the professional
conduct standard.

4.27. West Virginia Professional Teaching Standards (WVPTS). Five professional standards for
educator performance that define what teachers must know and be able to do. The WVPTS serve as the
foundation for educator preparation, teacher assessment, and professional development throughout the
state.

4.28. West Virginia Professional Leader Standards. Nine professional standards for educator
performance that define what school leaders must know and be able to do.

4.29. West Virginia Professional School Counselor Standards. Five professional standards for
educator performance that define what school counselors must know and be able to do.

4.30. Central Office Personnel. Professional personnel whose titles include, but are not limited to,
the following: central office administrator, supervisor, director, coordinator, and program specialist.

4.31. Performance Levels for Professional Support Personnel, Central Office Personnel, and Athletic
Coaches. Exemplary, Exceeds Standards, Meets Standards, or Unsatisfactory rating assigned to the
performance of professional support personnel, central office personnel, and athletic coaches.
