126CSR142

support employee’s signature does not imply concurrence with the evaluation and/or its rating. The
professional support employee shall receive a copy of the evaluation. The professional support employee
has the right to include a written statement as an addendum to the evaluation. An addendum and the
signature of the professional support employee must be affixed to the evaluation not later than five
working days following receipt of the written evaluation.

§126-142-17. Improvement Plan for Professional Support Personnel and Central Office Personnel.

17.1. An improvement plan shall be developed by the supervisor and the professional support/central
office employee when the professional support employee’s performance is unsatisfactory in any area of
responsibility as contained in section 19.

17.2. The improvement plan shall designate how the professional support/central office employee
shall meet standards. The improvement plan shall:

17.2.a. identify the deficiency(ies),
17.2.b. specify the corrective action to remediate the deficiency(ies),

17.2.c._ contain the time frame for monitoring and deadlines for meeting performance
characteristics, and in no case shall the improvement plan be for more than 18 weeks in length, and

17.2.d. describe the resources and assistance available to assist in correcting the deficiency(ies).

17.3. After a professional support/central office employee has successfully corrected deficiencies the
professional support/central office employee must continue to meet standards.

17.4. Nothing in this section shall supersede the provisions of W. Va. Code §§18-2E-6, 18-3-4, or
18A-2-8.

§126-142-18. Improvement Team for Professional Support Personnel and Central Office Personnel.

18.1. A referral to an improvement team for the professional support/central office employee whose
evaluation is Unsatisfactory may occur when the supervisor determines a need for such assistance. The
professional support/central office employee may request the assistance of an improvement team.

18.2. The improvement team shall be comprised of the professional support/central office
employee’s immediate supervisor, one additional administrator preferably at the same school level, and
one professional educator in the same or related specialization. The professional educator shall be
selected by the professional support/central office employee and approved by the county superintendent.
The selection of the other members of the improvement team shall be based upon county administrative
procedures adopted pursuant to section 3.2.

18.3. The improvement team shall serve only as a resource to the immediate supervisor who shall
retain authority for the evaluation.

18.4. The improvement team shall monitor the improvement plan and may: a) conduct observations
and conferences, b) provide training to assist the professional support/central office employee in meeting
the responsibilities outlined in the plan, and c) identify additional resources. Release time may be

16
