126CSR142

10.4. The school leader and the evaluator will mutually establish annual written goals for the
administrator's performance evaluation on or before November 1. The goals shall be related to student
learning and the school leaders’ job responsibilities as described in the leadership standards. The school
leader shall review school-wide data to establish a student learning goal and identify strategies and
measures that will be provided to document progress on the student learning goal. The second goal shall
be derived from the Self-reflection based on the West Virginia Professional Leader Standards.

10.5. The school leaders will annually administer a stakeholder survey on the overall effectiveness of
the school during the second semester. The surveys will provide the school leader(s) with perceptual data
to share with the evaluator at the year-end conference.

10.6. The evaluator will document the performance rating on each standard using the online
evaluation form and schedule a year-end evaluation conference with the school leader to share results
on or before July 1. The school leader’s signature in the online system denotes that the evaluator has
reviewed the evaluation with the school leader. The school leader’s signature does not imply concurrence
with the evaluation and/or its rating. The school leader has the right to include a statement as an
addendum to the evaluation. An addendum and the signature of the school leader must be submitted no
later than five working days following the date of the conference.

§126-142-11. School Leader Evaluation Standards.

11.1. School leaders shall be evaluated based on their performance within the following nine
standards which determine 80 percent of the summative evaluation rating:

11.1.a. Interpersonal and Collaborative Skills. The school leader demonstrates effective and
professional interpersonal and collaborative skills.

11.1.b. Clear and Focused Learning Mission. The school leader facilitates the development of the
strategic plan including a clear vision, mission, and goals.

11.1.c. Rigorous Curriculum, Engaging Instruction, and Balanced Assessments. The school leader
provides instructional leadership to establish and support a student-centered learning environment.

11.1.d. Positive Learning Climate and Cohesive Culture. The school leader builds and sustains a
safe and positive climate and cohesive culture.

11.1.e. Professional Growth and Retention of Quality Staff. The school leader identifies, supports,
and participates in professional development.

11.1.f. Support Systems for Student Success. The school leader creates and supports practices
that address students’ physical, social-emotional, and academic needs.

11.1.g. Operations to Promote Learning. The school leader demonstrates a proactive approach
in effectively managing the resources and operations of the school.

11.1.h. Family and Community Connections. The school leader communicates and creates
partnerships to engage students, staff, families, and the community.
