126CSR142

7.2. The three performance rating categories on the personnel evaluation form for employees for the
professional conduct standard are: a) Meets Standard, b) Below Standard, and c) Unsatisfactory. The
scale for assessing the criteria is articulated in the professional conduct rubric.

7.3. Rating Structure for Professional Student Support Personnel, Central Office Personnel, and
Athletic Coaches. The four performance rating categories on the personnel evaluation form for
employees are: a) Exemplary, b) Exceeds Standards, c) Meets Standards, and d) Unsatisfactory. The scale
for assessing the performance criteria is as follows:

7.3.a. Exemplary. Performance is consistently exceptional in meeting performance criteria
demonstrated by providing extraordinary opportunities for student success through instructional
practices that confirm the employee’s expertise and the ability to reach all students.

7.3.b. Exceeds Standards. Performance is consistently above average in meeting performance
criteria demonstrated by going beyond the established standards and instructional practices in reaching
all students.

7.3.c. Meets Standards. Performance is consistently adequate in meeting performance criteria.

7.3.d. Unsatisfactory. Performance is not consistently acceptable in meeting performance
criteria.

§126-142-8. Educator Evaluation.

8.1. As specified in W. Va. Code §18A-3C-2, educators shall complete a minimum of one summative
evaluation annually.

8.1.a. Eighty percent of the educator evaluation shall be based on an appraisal of the educator’s
ability to perform the established professional performance standards.

8.1.b. Twenty percent of the evaluation shall be based upon student growth.
8.1.b.1. Twenty percent of the evaluation of all educators shall be based upon student growth
as measured by two student learning goals. Progress toward meeting the two student learning goals shall
be measured using multiple measures of student growth.
8.2. Self-reflection. Educators shall complete an annual Self-reflection based upon the performance
standards on or before October 1. Evaluators review the educator Self-reflection, provide feedback, and
collaborate with the educator to determine personal professional learning needs.

8.3. Educator Evidence. Evidence is utilized to support performance level determination.

8.3.a. Evidence must be noted in the system in order to support a Distinguished rating. This
evidence can be located either in the Self-reflection or the summative evaluation, or both.

8.3.b. Evaluators record data using the online observation form.

8.3.c. If an evaluator disagrees with a rating in the Self-reflection, the individual being evaluated

6
