126CSR142

9.1.b.1. The CAP must include the following essential components: a) identified area of
unsatisfactory performance with reference to the standard(s) to be addressed; b) timeline for
implementation; and c) resources for support, including referral to other educators.

9.1.b.2. The CAP is determinative and may not be repeated. Evidence of adequate progress
must be demonstrated by the conclusion of the 18 week CAP. If evidence does not demonstrate that
adequate progress has been made at the conclusion of the 18 week period, termination for unsatisfactory
performance shall ensue. The area of unsatisfactory performance, with reference to the standards, guides
the choice of evidence within a CAP. This evidence may include observation, if appropriate.

9.1.b.3. Unsatisfactory performance related to a single element is addressed through quality
sustained job-embedded professional development and support. Two consecutive Unsatisfactory
performance-level summative ratings related to the same element are addressed through evaluation
based on the rubrics associated with the standard that addresses the educator’s professional
responsibilities for self-renewal that stipulate professional self-renewal as a requirement. Unsatisfactory
performance related to a single element cannot initiate a CAP.

9.2. lf an educator transfers within the county, as determined by county policy, or to any other county
within the state during the implementation of a FSP, the existence of a FSP shall be noted in the online
system. The new supervisor will conduct a conference and an observation of the educator to determine
the need and parameters of a continued FSP.

9.3. lfan educator transfers within the county, as determined by county policy, or to any other county
within the state during the implementation of a CAP, the plan is noted in the online system and transferred
to the new supervisor for continuation.

9.4. Unsatisfactory performance in any area of the Professional Conduct Standard results in an
Unsatisfactory rating of the standard.

9.4.a. Certain instances of misconduct as specified in W. Va. Code §18A-2-8 may require
immediate disciplinary action and/or a CAP.

9.4.b. Instances of unsatisfactory Professional Conduct not specified in W. Va. Code §18A-2-8
shall result in either a FSP or CAP determined at the discretion of the evaluator.

9.5. Nothing in this section shall supersede the provisions of W. Va. Code §§18-2E-6, 18-3-4, or
18A-2-8.

§126-142-10. Evaluation Process for School Leaders.

10.1. All school leaders shall participate in an annual summative evaluation conference on or before
July 1 that is recorded in the online evaluation system.

10.2. The school leader’s evaluator is responsible for monitoring performance and for preparing the
online evaluation.

10.3. The purpose of the evaluation is to set high standards of performance for school leaders, ensure
high-quality leadership focused on increasing student achievement, and encourage continuous growth
and improvement through personal reflection and goal setting.

8
