126CSR142

12.4.a.4. The final observation and conference shall be completed between March 1 and
May 1.

12.4.b. Teachers in the Intermediate Progression will be observed a minimum of two times for
the summative performance evaluation. The supervisor shall schedule one of the two observations with
the teacher.

12.4.b.1. The first observation and conference shall be completed on or before November 1.
12.4.b.2. The second observation and conference shall be completed on or before May 1.

12.4.c. Teachers in the Advanced Progression may request an observation(s) be conducted by the
evaluator. The evaluator shall conduct the requested observation(s) within a timeframe established
through communication between the teacher and the evaluator.

12.5. Evaluators may observe teachers at any time.
12.6. Lesson plans may not be used as a substitute for observations.

12.7. Teachers annually develop two Student Learning Goals and submit them via the online system
to their evaluator for review on or before November 1. The goals shall be related to improving student
achievement. The determination of the goals shall be based on the identified needs of the students, which
shall include a consideration of gaps in performance. All teachers in grades Kindergarten through Grade
3 shall include a goal to address increasing students’ reading and math proficiency. Evaluators verify that
the goals are rigorous, measurable, and comparable across classrooms. Evaluators may request goals be
modified.

12.8. Teachers submit evidence for each goal to validate progress of student learning and briefly
describe results on both Student Learning Goals. Evaluators review results and record a performance
level for the Student Learning performance standard.

12.9. Itinerant teachers, not assigned a home school, shall be assigned an immediate supervisor by
the county superintendent for purposes of evaluation.

12.10. The evaluator shall share the evaluation with the teacher during a scheduled conference and
the educator will accept the evaluation rating on or before June 15 with the option to append.

12.11. The teacher’s signature in the online system denotes that the evaluator has reviewed the
evaluation with the teacher. The teacher’s signature does not imply concurrence with the evaluation
and/or its rating. The teacher has the right to include a statement as an addendum to the evaluation. An
addendum and the signature of the teacher must be submitted no later than five working days following
the date of the conference.

§126-142-13. Teacher Evaluation Standards and Elements.
13.1. West Virginia Professional Teaching Standards. Teachers shall be evaluated based on their

performance within the following five standards which determine 80 percent of the summative evaluation
rating:

11
