126CSR142

11.1.). Continuous Improvement. The school leader ensures continuous improvement through
the implementation and monitoring of the strategic plan.

11.2. Student Growth. School leaders shall be evaluated based on demonstration of their students’
success through multiple measures which determines 20 percent of the summative evaluation rating as
determined by the results of the school leader’s two goals.

11.3. Professional Conduct. The Professional Conduct standard allows educators to address areas of
concern without necessitating an improvement plan. The Professional Conduct performance standard
does not, however, supplant code and policy to which educators remain fully accountable and is not
determinative of whether behavior is correctable. Certain violations may be corrected by implementation
of an improvement plan; others will require immediate action. The standard addresses the following
areas: Adhering to Policy and Procedure; Professional Attendance; Adhering to Schedule; and Respect.
An Unsatisfactory rating in any of these areas prompts a standard performance rating of Unsatisfactory.

§126-142-12. Evaluation Process for Teachers.

12.1. All teachers shall participate in an annual summative evaluation conference on or before the
teacher’s final day in the classroom for the school year, or on or before June 15 of the school year,
whichever occurs first. The evaluation is recorded in the online evaluation system.

12.2. The teacher’s evaluator is responsible for monitoring performance and for preparing the
evaluation.

12.3. The purpose of the evaluation is to set high standards of performance for teachers, ensure high-
quality instruction focused on increasing student achievement, encourage continuous growth and
improvement through personal reflection and goal setting, and serve as a tool in developing coaching and
mentoring programs for teachers.

12.4. Observations are to last the length of a lesson, but not less than 30 minutes. Evaluators record
data using the Observation form. Teachers shall have access to the completed Observation form prior to
the conference, which shall be scheduled and conducted within 10 days of the observation. Teachers and
evaluators exchange reflection and feedback and identify strategies and resources. They likewise review
any additional evidence presented at the conference. Evidence accumulated as part of the observation is
considered in the determination of the summative performance rating.

12.4.a. Teachers in the Initial Progression will be observed a minimum of four times for the
summative performance evaluation. Two observations shall be scheduled with the teacher and shall be

conducted during an instructional activity.

12.4.a.1. The first instructional observation and conference shall be completed on or before
November 1.

12.4.a.2. The second observation and conference shall be completed between November 1
and January 1.

12.4.a.3. The third observation and conference shall be completed between January 1 and
March 1.

10
