126CSR142

§126-142-4. Definitions.

4.1. Athletic Coach. A member of a school faculty, substitute teacher, student teacher within a public
school, or an authorized certified individual under contract with a county board of education who provides
instruction, direction, or supervision to athletic teams for the purpose of developing ability or skill to
perform in athletic contests.

4.2. Classroom Teacher. A professional educator who has a direct instructional relationship with
pupils.

4.3. Conference. A scheduled meeting between the evaluator and educator focusing on the
educator's performance.

4.4. Corrective Action Plan (CAP). Initiated when a Focused Support Plan (FSP) results in inadequate
progress and when an evaluation is completed that shows unsatisfactory performance based on one or
more of the standards or when certain instances of misconduct as specified in W. Va. Code §18A-2-8 may
require immediate action and/or a CAP. The CAP may address unsatisfactory performance involving
student learning goals when in conjunction with one or more of the standards.

4.5. Educators. Professionals who engage in the evaluation process.
4.6. Evaluation Instruments. The approved evaluation form(s) containing the performance criteria.

4.7. Evidence for School Leaders. Observable practices and/or artifacts selected by the educator
and/or the evaluator to support the determination of performance level ratings based on the nine
leadership standards. The evidence may be collected by either/both the school leader and the evaluator
for discussion during conference(s).

4.8. Evidence for Educators. Observable practices and/or artifacts selected by the educator and/or
the evaluator to support the determination of performance level ratings based on the professional
standards. The evidence may be collected by either/both the educator and the evaluator for discussion
during the observation or the evaluation conference(s).

4.9. Focused Support Plan (FSP). A proactive, preventative measure that supports individual
improvement and professional growth. The FSP may commence only after an observation and a
purposeful conversation have been conducted between the evaluator and the educator and when there
is documented evidence indicating an area of concern based on one or more of the performance
standards. The plan may address a documented area of concern involving the student growth standard
when in conjunction with one or more of the performance standards.

4.10. Goal Setting. The process of developing rigorous, measurable goals to improve student learning.
Goals span a school year, semester, or quarter.

4.11. Immediate Supervisor. A professional educator identified by the county superintendent to
conduct observations, complete evaluations, and write and monitor an FSP and CAP.

4.12. Observation. The opportunity to view educator practice and collect data to evaluate
performance. Evidence collected during observation helps evaluators clarify strengths and identify areas

2
