126CSR142
for growth.

4.13. Orientation. An annual meeting to assure that all employees have a full understanding of the
purposes, instruments, and procedures used in evaluating the performance of employees.

4.14. Performance Levels for Educators. A Distinguished, Accomplished, Emerging, or Unsatisfactory
rating assigned to the performance of an educator.

4.15. Professional Support Personnel. An individual who provides educational services within the
school including athletic trainer, education audiologist, school nurse, school psychologist, an individual
who provides direct social and emotional support services to students including Communities In Schools
(CIS) contact/facilitator, social worker, or an employee who works to address chronic absenteeism.

4.16. Progression. A designation earned by teachers based on the number of years of experience and
used in the evaluation process to determine the number/frequency of observations. The progressions
are as follows:

4.16.a. Initial Progression. Teachers in their first, second, or third year of experience.
4.16.b. Intermediate Progression. Teachers in their fourth or fifth year of experience.
4.16.c. Advanced Progression. Teachers in their sixth year of experience and beyond.
4.16.d. Teachers returning to the classroom.

4.16.d.1. Teachers who began their teaching careers in West Virginia, and are returning to
the classroom after a hiatus of three or more years, are to be evaluated as a teacher in the Initial
Progression for one school year. After the initial year and an evaluation, the teacher may be moved to
the appropriate progression based on years of experience and an evaluation of Accomplished or higher.

4.16.d.2. Teachers who began their teaching careers in states other than West Virginia shall
be evaluated as a teacher in the Initial Progression. After the initial year and an evaluation, the teacher
may be moved to the appropriate progression based on years of experience and an evaluation of
Accomplished or higher.

4.17. School Counselor. An individual with appropriate certification who serves as a counselor within
a school(s).

4.18. School Leader. Principals and assistant principals responsible for the collective success of their
school including the learning, growth, and achievement of students, staff, and self.

4.19. Standards and Elements. Indicators of professional practice used to evaluate the performance
of an employee.

4.19.a. Performance Standards. Standards of professional practice that are used to demonstrate
what educators know and are able to do.

4.19.b. Student Growth Standard. Standard that requires educators to demonstrate their
students’ success through increased student achievement.

3
