126CSR142
§126-142-5. Training.
5.1. All evaluators shall be trained in management and evaluation skills in the current system.

5.2. The West Virginia Department of Education (WVDE) shall provide education and training in
evaluation skills to administrative personnel who conduct evaluations. Professional evaluations may only
be conducted by personnel who hold valid administrative certification and Evaluation Leadership Institute
(ELI) certification.

§126-142-6. Principles of Operation.

6.1. County administrative procedures for conducting employee evaluations shall include: a) the
identity of the immediate supervisor who conducts the observations and evaluations; b) the process to
be used in improving an employee's performance based on the evaluation results; c) monitoring to assure
evaluations are completed; and d) utilization of data from self-reflection results to determine county
professional learning needs.

6.2. All monitoring and/or observations of the employee shall be conducted openly.

6.3. An employee whose performance evaluation is rated Unsatisfactory shall be given an opportunity
to correct the deficiencies.

6.4. Each county’s administrative procedures shall be implemented in conformity with grievance and
other due process requirements.

6.5. To assure that all employees have a full understanding of the evaluation policy and procedures,
an orientation meeting shall be conducted annually for all employees at the beginning of the employment
period or within two weeks of an employee’s reporting date. The evaluation process shall be initiated
annually, regardless of the date of hire.

6.6. To assure that all employees have a meaningful opportunity to implement the evaluation policy,
employees shall be provided access to the instruments and procedures and appropriate time for
collaboration during the school day.

§126-142-7. Rating Structure.

7.1. Rating Structure for Educators. The four performance rating categories in the educator
evaluation system for the performance and student growth standards are: a) Distinguished,
b) Accomplished, c) Emerging, and d) Unsatisfactory. The scale for assessing the performance criteria is
as follows:

7.1.a. Distinguished. Performance which is consistently exceptional.
7.1.b. Accomplished. Performance which demonstrates mastery of the standard.

7.1.c. Emerging. Performance which meets the basic standard and has an opportunity for
professional growth.

7.1.d. Unsatisfactory. Performance which does not meet the basic standard.

5
