126CSR142

20.8.a.6. commands respect by example in appearance, manners, behavior, and language.
20.9. Technology Standards.

20.9.a. Demonstrates competence and knowledge in the implementation of technology
standards identified by the WVBE policies which are based on the International Society for Technology in
Education (ISTE) Standards. Items that may be used to reflect instructional leadership competencies:

20.9.a.1. demonstrates a sound understanding of technology operations and concepts,

20.9.a.2. applies technology to facilitate a variety of effective assessment and evaluation
strategies,

20.9.a.3. uses technology to enhance productivity and professional practice, and

20.9.a.4. understands the social, ethical, legal, and human issues surrounding the use of
technology in pre-k-12 schools and applies that understanding in practice.

§126-142-21. Evaluation Process for Athletic Coaches.

21.1. The primary purpose of the evaluation is to provide information necessary to make an objective
assessment of the performance of coaches and assistant coaches and to assure that quality coaching is
provided to the student athlete.

21.2. A minimum of one written evaluation per coach's and assistant coach’s contract period is
required each year.

21.3. Principals, assistant principals, or athletic directors who hold an administrative certificate
according to W. Va. Code §18A-2-12 shall evaluate coaches and assistant coaches. The evaluator is
responsible for monitoring performance and professional conduct and for preparing the written
evaluation. When monitoring professional conduct, consideration should be given to the following:
adhering to policy and procedure; professional attendance; adhering to schedule; and respect.

21.4. The principal, assistant principal, or athletic director shall conduct observations and evaluations
of head coaches. A minimum of two observations is required for each evaluation.

21.5. The principal, assistant principal, or athletic director, with input from the head coach, shall
conduct observations and evaluations of assistant coaches. A minimum of two observations is required
for each evaluation.

21.6. The principal, assistant principal, or athletic director shall share the evaluation with the
coach/assistant coach during a scheduled conference and within a four week period at the conclusion of
each sport’s season as defined by West Virginia Secondary School Activities Commission (WVSSAC).

21.7. The coaches and assistant coaches have the right to include a written statement as an
addendum to the evaluation.

21.8. The coach and/or assistant coach shall sign the evaluation form denoting that the supervisor

20
