126CSR142
has the opportunity to provide evidence to support the Self-reflection rating.

8.3.d. Any evidence collected or provided will be considered by the evaluator when determining
the summative rating.

8.4. Goal Setting. Educators shall complete the goal setting process on or before November 1.
§126-142-9. Plans to Support Improvement.

9.1. Plans to Support Improvement. A plan to support improvement shall be developed by the
evaluator and the educator when an educator's performance indicates an area of concern and/or the
educator is rated Unsatisfactory in any area of the educator’s responsibilities. There are two types of
plans:

9.1.a. Focused Support Plan (FSP). A proactive measure that supports individual improvement
and professional growth. The FSP, and its implementation, is an improvement process between the
educator and the evaluator. The FSP may commence only after a purposeful conversation between the
educator and the evaluator, and when there is documented evidence indicating an area of concern based
on one or more of the performance standards, and after at least one observation and conference is
complete for the educator. The FSP, and its implementation, is an improvement process between the
educator and the evaluator. The FSP spans at minimum nine weeks and may commence at any time
during the school year and may be repeated once per plan.

9.1.4.1. The FSP must include the following essential components: a) identified area of
concern with reference to the standards to be addressed, b) expectations for change, c) nine week
timeline for implementation, and d) resources for support.

9.1.a.2. The following supports may be considered to meet individual needs: a) professional
development, b) coaching/instructional support, c) mentoring, d) peer observation, e) programs of study,
and f) other supports and resources.

9.1.a.3. The FSP enacted for an educator may address an area of concern involving student
learning goals when in conjunction with one or more of the performance standards. School-wide student
growth performance levels cannot be considered in a FSP.

9.1.a.4. At the conclusion of the nine week FSP, if evidence demonstrates that the standard
has been met, then the plan is successfully completed. If evidence demonstrates that adequate progress
has been made but the standard has not been met, the FSP will continue for a second nine week period.
In the event of inadequate progress on the standard related to the area of concern, an evaluation will be
completed and a CAP will be initiated.

9.1.b. Corrective Action Plan (CAP). The CAP is initiated when a FSP results in inadequate progress
and when an evaluation is completed that shows unsatisfactory performance based on one or more of
the standards or when certain instances of misconduct as specified in W. Va. Code §18A-2-8 may require
immediate action and/or a CAP. The CAP may address unsatisfactory performance involving student
learning goals when in conjunction with one or more of the standards. A minimum of one observation
must be complete for the educator prior to the beginning of a CAP. The CAP spans 18 weeks and may
commence at any time during the school year.
