126CSR142

15.7. Student Impact. School counselors shall be evaluated based on demonstration of their students’
success through multiple measures which determines 15 percent of the summative evaluation rating.

15.8. Professional Conduct. The Professional Conduct standard allows educators to address areas of
concern without necessitating an improvement plan. The Professional Conduct performance standard
does not, however, supplant code and policy to which educators remain fully accountable and is not
determinative of whether behavior is correctable. Certain violations may be corrected by implementation
of an improvement plan; others will require immediate action. The standard addresses the following
areas: Adhering to Policy and Procedure; Professional Attendance; Adhering to Schedule; and Respect.
An Unsatisfactory rating in any of these areas prompts a standard performance rating of Unsatisfactory.

§126-142-16. Evaluation Process for Professional Support Personnel and Central Office Personnel.

16.1. Professional support and central office personnel shall receive a written evaluation a minimum
of one time per year.

16.2. The immediate supervisor, as defined by the county superintendent, is responsible for
monitoring performance and professional conduct and for preparing the written evaluation. When
monitoring professional conduct, consideration should be given to the following: adhering to policy and
procedure; professional attendance; adhering to schedule; and respect.

16.3. The purpose of the evaluation is to improve the professional support and central office
employee’s performance and professional growth. The professional support/central office employee and
the immediate supervisor will mutually establish annual written goals for the professional support
employee’s performance evaluation on or before November 1. The goals shall be related to the
professional support/central office employee’s job responsibilities. In addition to the goal setting
conference, the professional support/central office employee and the supervisor will meet at least once
annually to review progress toward meeting the established goals. The supervisor will schedule an
evaluation conference with the professional support/central office employee to share findings and
prepare the written evaluation. The professional support/central office employee shall receive a copy of
the evaluation within five working days.

16.4. The primary data source for the performance evaluation will be information and documentation
related to the mutually established goals. The professional support/central office employee shall
maintain a portfolio of materials that validate progress or completion of the mutually established goals.
The professional support/central office employee’s supervisor may also collect documentation relating to
these goals. The supervisor will evaluate the professional support/central office employee’s performance
using a narrative description to document the progress made toward goal attainment or to document
unsatisfactory performance. Because the mutually established goals will be unique to each professional
support/central office employee, it follows that the evaluation narrative will focus on the professional
support/central office employee’s demonstration of those skills identified in the performance
characteristics. Therefore, the evaluation will be goal directed and may incorporate the performance
characteristics in the narrative description. The supervisor may include those performance characteristics
appropriate to the mutually established goals. The performance characteristics should be identified
during the goal setting conference. The portfolios maintained by the professional support/central office
employee and the supervisor shall be included as part of the evaluation documentation.

16.5. The professional support/central office employee’s signature on the evaluation form denotes
that the supervisor has reviewed the evaluation with the professional support employee. The professional

15
