126CSR136

11.11.d. Renewal of the Adult Permit endorsed for areas of CTE. A candidate applying for
renewal of an Adult Permit endorsed for employment in areas of CTE specified in the West Virginia CTE
Endorsement and Testing Manual is required to submit documentation that they meet the following
criteria: Completion of WVLearns courses or six semester hours of college/university coursework
reflecting a minimum 3.00 GPA related to public education; a valid industry credential as specified in
the West Virginia CTE Endorsement and Testing Manual, if applicable; and, be recommended for renewal
by the superintendent of the employing county, Multi-County CTE Administrator, or WVSDT
Superintendent or designee.

11.11.e. The Adult Permit endorsed for areas of CTE employment is valid for a maximum of five
years and expires on June 30 of the last year of its validity. A candidate applying for an Adult Permit
endorsed for areas of CTE is required to submit documentation that they meet all criteria in accordance
with section 11.10.d for an initial permit and section 11.10.d.1 for a renewal of the permit.

11.11.e.1. Adult Permit endorsed for Emergency Medical Services (EMS) Public Service
Training). An Adult Permit endorsed for Emergency Medical Services Public Services Training {EMS} for
part-time employment is valid for a maximum of five years and expires on June 30 of the last year of its
validity. A candidate applying for an Adult Permit endorsed for EMS is required to submit documentation
that they meet all the criteria required in section 11.10.f for an initial permit and section 11.10.f.2 for a
renewal of the permit.

11.11.e.2. Adult Permit endorsed for Fire Service Training (Public Service Training). An Adult
Permit endorsed for Fire Service Training for part-time employment is valid for a maximum of five years
and expires on June 30 of the last year of its validity. A candidate applying for an Adult Permit endorsed
for Fire Service Training is required to submit documentation that they meet all the criteria required in in
section 11.11.b for an initial permit and section 11.11.c for a renewal of the permit.

11.11.f. Initial Emergency Medical Services (EMS) Adult Permit. A candidate applying for an
initial EMS (Public Service Training) Adult Permit for part-time employment is required to submit
documentation that they meet the following criteria: completion of the general requirements established
in section 9; holds a current West Virginia Emergency Medical Technician (EMT) license, West Virginia
Paramedic Certification, National Registry EMT, or Paramedic license; completion of four years of recent
volunteer or paid work experience, which may include emergency room or emergency medical care,
beyond the training period in the occupation to be taught; scores reflecting a minimum of 84 percent on
a WVDE-approved examination; holds a valid cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) instructor certification;
and,

11.11.f.1. Completion of a WVDE-approved instructor course: Successful completion of an
EMT field-based experience; holds a minimum of a high school diploma, a state-approved high school
equivalency, or a degree, if applicable, through an accredited IHE; and, be recommended by the WVDE-
approved provider or a designated official from the WVDE Office of Adult Education.

11.11.f.2. Renewal of an EMS Adult Permit. A candidate for renewal of an Emergency
Medical Services (EMS) Adult Permit for part-time employment is required to submit documentation that
they meet the following criteria: holds a valid West Virginia EMT, West Virginia Paramedic Certification,
or National Registry EMT or Paramedic license; holds a valid CPR instructor certification; has completed
30 hours of teaching activity in EMS or related courses subsequent to the issuance of the permit being

56
