126CSR136

acquisition; and modifying assessment(s) in accordance with an IEP. A Consultative Special Education
Teacher is not the teacher of record for students to whom they are providing services.

19.3. Alternative Option for Additional Endorsement in Special Education.

19.3.a. Additional Endorsement in Autism. A candidate who holds a Professional Teaching
Certificate endorsed in Emotional/Behavior Disorders, Multi-Categorical Special Education, Mental
Impairment (Mild/Moderate), Severe Disabilities, Pre-School Special Needs, or their equivalent in
accordance with this policy, may apply and be issued an additional endorsement in Autism if the candidate
has successfully completed six semester hours of coursework with a letter grade of “B” or above in Autism
from an accredited IHE in accordance with section 19.3.a.1.

19.3.a.1. Field Experience. A minimum of 50 percent of three of the six mandatory semester
hours of coursework must be comprised of field-based experiences or the candidate must provide written
verification of a minimum of 30 hours of field-based experiences serving students with Autism.

19.3.a.2. Restricted Content Endorsement. A candidate applying for, or holding, a
First-Class/Full-Time Permit or Out-of-Field Authorization endorsed in Emotional/Behavior Disorders,
Multi-Categorical Special Education, Mental Impairment (Mild/Moderate), Severe Disabilities, Pre-School
Special Needs, or their equivalent in accordance with this policy may be issued a restricted Content
Endorsement in Autism if they are enrolled in, or have completed, the mandatory six semester hours of
coursework in accordance with section 19.3.a; and, submit verification of holding a professional teaching
certificate endorsed for one of the areas identified in this section and of the candidate’s enrollment in six
semester hours of mandatory coursework for Autism in accordance with section 19.3.a.

19.3.a.3. Validity Period. The Restricted Content Endorsement for Autism is valid for one year
and may be renewed once with verification of a minimum of three completed hours of the Autism
coursework with a 3.00/B GPA in each course from an accredited IHE that offers Autism-specific
coursework.

§126-136-20. Athletic Training and Limited Sports Training.

20.1. General Requirements. A county board of education is required to employ an individual as a
registered athletic Trainer(s), or an individual(s) with a limited sports training authorization, to perform
duties during football practices and games for grades 9, 10,11, and 12. Aschool serving students in grades
9, 10, 11, and 12 that does not have an athletic trainer or an individual with a limited sports training
authorization, is prohibited from participating in football practices or games. A candidate applying for an
Athletic Training or Limited Sports Training Authorization is required to submit documentation that they
meet the applicable general requirements for licensure in accordance with section 9. A county board of
education is prohibited from employing a candidate for an Athletic Trainer or Limited Sports Trainer in
good faith on the anticipation that the candidate is eligible for acertificate. An Athletic Training or Limited
Sports Training Authorization is effective for the employment start date provided on the candidate’s
application or the date that the application was received by the WVDE, whichever occurs last.

20.2. Athletic Training Authorization. A candidate applying for an Athletic Training Authorization is
required to submit documentation that they are certified as in athletic training through the Board of
Certification, Inc. for Athletic Trainings and registered with the West Virginia Board of Physical Therapy.
An Athletic Training Authorization may be renewed annually upon application and submitting

86
