126CSR136

submits documentation that they meet the following criteria: holds a valid out-of-state certificate
equivalent to the CTE Certificate of eligibility issued by another state that meets all of the requirements
of that state for full certification; with verification of five years of successful full-time teaching experience
in a public school in the area(s) of CTE endorsement(s) reflected on the certificate and the required
industry recognized credential/s or passing scores on tests as identified in WV Endorsement and Testing
Manual, and passes a criminal history record check conducted by the West Virginia State Police and the
FBI as required by W. Va. Code §18A-3-10 and section 9.2.

10.4.c. Permanent CTE Certificate.

10.4.c.1. Conditions for Issuance. A candidate for licensure is required to submit
documentation that they meet the following criteria:

10.4.c.1.A. Hold or be eligible for a CTE Certificate valid for five years; and,

10.4.c.1.A.1. Hold an earned MA related to the public education as defined in section
9.10; and

10.4.c.1.A.2. Completed five years of professional educational experience including
two years in the specialization(s) for which the permanent certificate is requested; or

10.4.c.1.B. Hold a CTE Certificate valid for five years; and,
10.4.c.1.B.1. Renew the CTE Certificate valid for five years after meeting the criteria
in accordance with section 10.5; and

10.4.c.1.C. Recommendation. If the candidate is currently employed by a county board
of education, multi-county CTE center, or WVSDT, the candidate must be recommended for a Permanent
CTE Certificate by the employing county superintendent. If the educator is not employed by a county
board of education, then the educator must secure a recommendation from a personal or professional
reference that is not related to, nor residing in the same household as, the candidate.

10.4.c.2. Validity Period. The Permanent CTE Certificate shall remain valid unless it is
surrendered, suspended, or revoked.

10.5. Other Certificates.
10.5.a. Professional Business Official Certificate.

10.5.a.1. General Criteria. A Professional Business Official Certificate may be issued to a
candidate employed for a specific assignment who has completed a minimum of a BA through an
accredited |HE; the general requirements specified in section 9; met the minimum GPA in accordance with
section 9.11; and satisfied the conditions for issuance specified in section 10.5.

10.5.a.2. Conditions for Issuance. The candidate for the Professional Business Official
Certificate is required to submit documentation that they meet the following criteria: holds a minimum
of a BA, including 24 semester hours of coursework in accounting completed with a minimum of 2.50 GPA;
and be recommended for a Professional Business Official Certificate by the county superintendent based
on the candidate being the most qualified candidate for the position.

37
