126CSR136

certificates are defined in section 4. For purposes of advance salary classification, a foreign credential
evaluation report shall include the number of equivalent semester hours completed.

22.2.b. Graduate coursework completed after July 1, 1994, utilized for advance salary purposes
shall be: related to the public education program in accordance with section 9.10; included in a degree
program in the field of education; content and/or professional education coursework related to the
current licensure; content and/or professional education coursework required for an additional
endorsement held; professional learning/special topics coursework approved by the WVDE; coursework
identified in the personnel evaluation process; coursework related to technology for education; or,
coursework related to the mission and goals of the WVBE. Undergraduate level coursework for advanced
salary purposes shall be related to public education, as defined in section 4.63.

22.2.b.1. Exception. Graduate coursework for Chief School Business Official and Professional
Accountant must be related to the endorsement area on the Professional School/County Business Official
certificate.

22.2.c. Duplicate credit is not permitted for advanced salary purposes.

22.2.d. Master’s Degree Salary Classification. An individual holding a professional certificate or
its equivalent and an MA based on less than 30 semester hours of credit may qualify for the MA+15,
MA+30, MA+45 advanced salary classification by completing 15, 30, or 45 semester hours of
college/university credit respectively, beyond the degree requirements. All college/university coursework
hours verified as completed toward the MA shall be included on the official college/university transcript,
or the foreign credential evaluation.

22.2.e. Permits and Salary Class. An individual employed on a permit in a specialization which
requires completion of an MA program for the Initial Professional Student Support, Administrative
Certificate, or its equivalent is eligible for a BA+15 salary classification upon completion of 15 semester
hours of coursework leading to the MA in the specialization the permit is being issued. Advanced degree
level recognition is prohibited for permits or authorizations issued (W. Va. Code §18A-4-1). Permits and
authorizations may only be granted the degree required for its issuance. Equivalent certificates are
treated as professional equivalents and eligible for an advanced salary classification.

22.2.e.1. Exception for Degree Recognition. An individual holding a Juris Doctor (JD) or
Education Specialist (Ed.S) advanced degree equivalent to a master’s degree or higher, which is not
recognized by the WVBE, may be eligible for the degree level of MA without salary classification to satisfy
the degree requirements for the purposes of obtaining a Professional Certificate requiring a master’s
degree.

22.2.f. Undergraduate Hour Requirements. A candidate may utilize 15 semester hours of
undergraduate level credit from an accredited |HE for an advanced salary classification if the hours were
related to the public education in accordance with section 9.10.f. Undergraduate level coursework shall
be completed after the issuance of the specialization on the Professional Teaching, Student Support, or
Administrative Certificate. Undergraduate level coursework must be earned on, or after July 1, 1984, and
after the issuance of the Initial Professional Teaching, Student Support, or Administrative Certificate, to
be eligible for an advanced salary classification.

90
