126CSR136

Assistant, with the appropriate authorization, may perform tasks that are within their scope of
responsibilities that they have the training and expertise to perform as determined by the WVDE Office
of Special Education. A Speech Assistant may be employed only when a fully West Virginia-certified SLP
did not apply for the vacant position.

18.14. Assignment of Preschool Special Needs Teachers. An educator who holds a certificate
endorsed for preschool special needs, preschool handicapped, or developmentally delayed reflecting a
pre-k-Kindergarten (K) programmatic level may be assigned as the teacher of record in a regular pre-k
classroom but may not be assigned as the teacher of record in a kindergarten classroom (W. Va. Code
§18-20-1a).

18.15. Assignment of Special Education Teachers. A teacher assigned to serve students with
exceptionalities in intellectual disabilities, emotional/behavior disorders, specific learning disabilities,
vision impaired, or deaf and hard of hearing in grades 7-12 or 5-12 may be assigned to serve students in
grades 7-Adult or 5-Adult. A teacher assigned to serve students with exceptionalities in intellectual
disabilities, emotional/behavior disorders, and/or specific learning disabilities in grades 1-12 or K-12 may
be assigned to serve students in grades K-Adult. A teacher assigned to serve students with exceptionalities
in vision impaired or deaf and hard of hearing in grades 1-12 or K-12 may be assigned to serve students in
grades pre-k-Adult. All programmatic level modifications included in this section require the teacher to
apply for, and to be issued, the appropriate licensure from the WVDE.

18.16. Assignment of School Nurse. A School Nurse assigned to serve students in grades 1-12 may
be assigned to serve students in grades pre-k-Adult provided the nurse applies for and is issued the
appropriate licensure from the WVDE. The school health service assignments/duties for the
Full -Time/First-Class Permit, Professional Student Support Certificate, and Authorization for School
Nurse, or Temporary Nurse Certificate, or Nurse Certificate may comprise the full scope of responsibilities
(W. Va. Code §18-5-22) and W. Va. 126CSR25A, Policy 2422.7, Standards for Basic and Specialized Health
Care Procedures (Policy 2422.7).

18.16.a. A School Nurse holding a Long-Term Substitute Permit is prohibited from performing
substitute teaching duties in any area other than School Nurse unless the requirements in section 11.10.b
have been satisfied.

18.17. Assignment to Positions for Which No Specific Endorsement is Required. Positions in
instructional areas including, but not limited to, theatre, dance, and computer science does not require a
specific endorsement referenced in the West Virginia Education Information System (WVEIS) course code
manual; however, the position must be filled by a person holding a Professional Teaching Certificate for
the appropriate programmatic level.

18.18. Assignment of Technology Integration Specialist. An individual assigned as a Technology
Integration Specialist must hold a Technology Integration Specialist Advanced Credential or a Temporary
Authorization endorsed for Technology Integration Specialist.

18.19. Assignment of an Athletic Coach. An individual assigned as a paid or volunteer Athletic Coach
must hold a valid Coaching Authorization; a Professional Certificate (Teaching, Student Support,
Administrative); Long-Term or Short-Term Substitute Permit in a teaching area; or a JROTC Authorization,
or aCTE certificate. A county board of education is prohibited from employing a candidate in good faith
on the anticipation that they are eligible for a certificate.

84
