126CSR136

renewed; attended at least three approved instructor seminars subsequent to the issuance of the permit
being renewed; and, be recommended for renewal by the WVDE-approved provider or a designated
official from the WVDE Office of Adult Education.

11.11.g. Initial Fire Service Training Adult Permit. A candidate for an initial Fire Service Training
Adult Permit for part-time employment is required to submit documentation that they meet the following
criteria: the general requirements established in section 9; completion of four years of volunteer, or paid,
work experience in the fire service field; completion of an approved instructor training program;
completion of a field-based experience in fire instructor training; completion of required training in
firefighting and hazardous materials; and holds a current Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR)
certification, First Aid or Advanced EMS certification, and test scores reflecting a minimum of 84 percent
on a WVDE-approved examination; and, a minimum of a high school diploma, or a state-approved high
school equivalency, or a degree, if applicable, through an accredited IHE. Receive the recommendation
for an initial Fire Service Training Adult Permit by the WVDE-approved provider or a designated official
from the WVDE Office of Adult Education.

11.11.g.1. Renewal. A candidate for renewal of the Fire Service Training Adult Permit for
part-time employment is required to submit documentation that they meet the following criteria:
completed 30 hours of teaching activity in an approved fire service or related course subsequent to the
issuance of the permit being renewed; attended at least three approved instructor seminars subsequent
to the issuance of the certificate being renewed; and, be recommended for renewal by the WVDE-
approved provider or a designated WVDE official from the WVDE Office of Adult Education.

11.11.h. Driver Education Temporary Permit. When providing driver educator instruction in the
public schools, a candidate for a Driver Education Temporary Permit may only be employed under a
contract with the respective county board of education. The contract shall include the duties the permit
holder will be required to perform; a rate of pay for the permit holder that is equivalent to the rate of pay
for professional educators in the respective county board of education performing similar duties as extra
duty assignments; and, the county board of education will maintain liability insurance associated with the
activity. A candidate issued this credential is required to report any moving violations including, a driving
under the influence violation (DUI), to the WVDE within 7 days of the violation being issued.

11.11.h.1. A candidate for a Driver Education Temporary Permit must submit documentation
that they meet the following criteria:

11.11.h.1.A. Holds a minimum of a BA degree in any field of study or a high school
diploma with five years of documented professional experience as a driving instructor; and completes an
orientation program approved by the WVDE;

11.11.h.1.B. Has held a valid motor vehicle operator's license for the past five years;

11.11.h.1.C. Be in good health and free from impairments that would adversely affect the
safety of students and the public;

11.11.h.1.D. Have a satisfactory driving record confirmed through the West Virginia
Department of Public Safety and/or Division of Motor Vehicles (DMV);

57
