126CSR136

4.77. Validity Period. The time period a certificate is valid as reflected by the effective and expiration
dates on a certificate.

4.78. Valid Out-of-State Certificate. A certificate to work as a public school teacher, administrator,
or Student Support Personnel issued by a recognized licensing authority outside of the State that is
unencumbered, not expired, or been surrendered, revoked, or currently suspended.

4.79. West Virginia Board of Education (WVBE)-Approved High School Equivalency Exam. A high
school equivalency exam approved by the WVBE.

4.80. West Virginia CTE Endorsement and Testing Manual. A listing of all WVBE-required licensure
exams and industry credentials required for educator certification and completion of WVBE-approved CTE
programs leading to West Virginia licensure and available on the WVDE website.

4.81. West Virginia Commission for Professional Teaching Standards (WVCPTS). The official body
representative of the educational community that is responsible for reviewing and recommending to the
WVBE standards for the licensure of educational personnel; presiding over hearings and making
recommended decisions to the State Superintendent related to licensure; any other duties related to
licensure assigned by the WVBE.

4.82. West Virginia Department of Education (WVDE). The state education agency overseen by the
State Superintendent of Schools and established (W. Va. Code §18-3-9).

4.83. West Virginia Higher Education Policy Commission (WVHEPC). The statewide higher education
policy commission established (W. Va. Code §18B-1B-1).

4.84. West Virginia Licensure Testing Directory (directory). A listing of all WVBE-required licensure
exams and validity periods for educator certification and completion of WVBE-approved programs leading
to West Virginia licensure and available on the WVDE website.

4.85. West Virginia Provisional Alternative Certificate. A certificate assuring that the minimum
criteria required for certification has been met with a one-year validity period and an option to renew the
certification twice. This certificate may be issued to a candidate who meets full-time experience
requirements, and/or academic standards from an out-of-state IHE; or currently holds a valid Alternative
Teaching Certificate; and is employed full-time in a West Virginia public school; and meets the
requirements of section 9.

§126-136-5. Categories of Licenses.

5.1. Professional Certificate. The Professional Certificate may be issued to a candidate who meets
prescribed full-time experience and/or academic and professional standards and has been assessed as
competent to assume a role in public education within the specialization(s) and grade level(s) designated
on this certificate. A Professional Certificate may be issued in teaching, student support services, or
administrative specializations.

5.2. Alternative Teaching Certificate. The Alternative Program Teacher Certificate is a teaching
certificate that authorizes a person to teach while participating in a WVBE-approved alternative program
for the education of teachers in accordance with W. Va. 126CSR161, Policy 5901, Regulations for
