126CSR136

10.3.a.3.B.1. General Criteria. The application for renewal is required to be submitted
after January 1 of the year the certificate expires. The candidate for licensure is required to submit
documentation that they meet the following criteria:

10.3.a.3.B.1.(a). Six semester hours of coursework from an accredited IHE with a
minimum 3.00 GPA in each course related to public education or WVDE WVLearns courses completed
subsequent to the issuance of the certificate being renewed and within the five-year period immediately
preceding the date of application; or a Master’s +30 salary classification, or is a minimum of 60 years old;
and

10.3.a.3.B.1.(b). Recommendation. If the candidate is currently employed by a
county board of education, multi-county CTE center, or WVSDT, the candidate must be recommended for
renewal by the employing county superintendent. If the educator is not employed by a county board of
education, then the educator must secure a recommendation from a personal or professional reference
that is not related to, nor residing in the same household as, the candidate.

10.3.a.3.C. Exceptions.

10.3.a.3.C.1. School Nurse candidates with an expired certificate and an offer of
employment who worked in the nursing field for the previous academic year may be issued a one-year
authorization to meet the requirements for renewal of the Professional Student Support Certificate with
verification from the entity where the candidate was employed in a nursing capacity.

10.3.b. Professional Five-Year Student Support Certificate.

10.3.b.1. Conditions for Issuance. The candidate for licensure is required to submit
documentation that they meet the following criteria:

10.3.b.1.A. Coursework. Six semester hours of coursework from an accredited IHE with a
minimum 3.00 GPA in each course related to public education or WVDE WVLearns courses completed
subsequent to the issuance of the certificate being renewed and within the five-year period immediately
preceding the application date; or a Master’s +30 salary classification, or is minimum of 60 years old; and,

10.3.b.1.B. Experience. Two years of full-time experience, one year of which must have
been completed in West Virginia in one, or a combination of, the endorsement(s) on the candidate’s
Professional Student Support Certificate.

10.3.b.2. Validity Period. The Professional Student Support Certificate is valid for five years
and expires on June 30 of the last year of its validity.

10.3.b.3. Renewal of Five-Year Student Support Certificate.
10.3.b.3.A. Six semester hours of coursework from an accredited |HE with a minimum
3.00 GPA in each course related to public education or WVDE WVLearns courses completed subsequent

to the issuance of the certificate being renewed and within the five-year period immediately preceding
the date of application; or a Master’s +30 salary classification, or is minimum of 60 years old; and

33
