126CSR136

11.10.b.2.B.1. Hold an expired West Virginia Professional Certificate or a valid or
expired out-of-state Professional Teaching, Student Support, or Administrative Certificate endorsed for
the specialization(s) or consistent with the specialization(s) for which the candidate has applied for a Long-
Term Substitute Permit ; candidates for the Long Term Substitute Permit may use the expired West
Virginia Professional Certificate or Out-of-State Professional Certificate, as established in this section, only
once to obtain a Long-Term Substitute Permit provided, that the Certificate has not been expired for more
than five years prior to the application date. If the Certificate has been expired longer than five years
prior to the application date for the Substitute Permit, the candidate is required to meet the requirements
established in section 11.10.b.1 be issued a Long-Term Substitute Permit; and, be recommended for a
Long-Term Substitute Permit by the superintendent of the employing county.

11.10.b.3. Exceptions. Acandidate applying for a School Nurse Substitute Permit is required
to hold a valid RN licensure issued by the West Virginia Registered Nurse Board and have completed 12
hours of training related to school nursing and six hours of clinical time with a certified school nurse who
is an RN. The WVDE shall review the current status of any disciplinary action prior to issuance of a
certificate.

11.10.b.4. Validity Period. The Long-Term Substitute Permit is valid for not more than three
school years and expires on June 30 of the last year of its validity.

11.10.b.5. Renewal of a Long-Term Substitute Permit for Teaching, Support, and
Administrative Personnel. A candidate applying to renew a Long-Term Substitute Permit for Teaching,
Support and Administrative Personnel is required to submit documentation that they meet the following
criteria:

11.10.b.5.A. Verified Training. Verification that they meet the training requirements
established in section 11.10.a.4.A.

11.10.b.5.B. Exceptions. A candidate applying to renew a School Nurse Substitute Permit
is required to have successfully completed 12 hours of training related to school nursing and hold a valid
RN licensure issued by the West Virginia Registered Nurse Board. The WVDE shall review the current
status of any disciplinary action prior to issuance of a permit.

11.10.b.6. Acandidate with a valid West Virginia Professional Certificate, or a permit for Non-
United States Citizen, may apply for a Long-Term Substitute Permit for any specialization area(s) for which
the candidate qualifies in accordance with section 11.7 without completing the initial 18 clock hours of
training. If a candidate has maintained a valid the West Virginia Professional Certificate, the candidate is
not required to complete the 12 clock hours of renewal training when renewing their Long-Term
Substitute Permit; provided, the candidate meets all other requirements.

11.10.c. Initial Substitute CTE Permit.

11.10.c.1. General Criteria. An initial Substitute CTE Permit for teaching in a CTE secondary
or adult program may be issued to a candidate meeting the following criteria: holds a high school diploma
or state-approved high school equivalency, or a degree, if applicable, through an accredited IHE; the
general requirements in accordance with section 9; the common conditions for issuance established in
section 11.10.c.2; and the appropriate content-specific conditions for issuance specified in the West
Virginia CTE Endorsement and Testing Manual.

51
