126CSR136

23.3.b. Limitations for Salary Supplement. The number of SLPs, counselors, school
psychologists, or school nurses eligible for an annual salary supplement is limited to 115 combined total
for the fiscal year beginning July 1, 2008, with an additional 115 allowable each fiscal year thereafter. The
eligible professional personnel shall be determined each fiscal year by ranking: verification of the length
of time that advanced certification has been held; the length of time that West Virginia certification in the
endorsement area has been held; and, the total months of public-school work experience completed in
the endorsement area.

23.3.c. Limitations for Reimbursement. The number of SLPs, counselors, school psychologists,
or school nurses eligible, upon attainment of the advanced certification, for reimbursement of the
remainder of the application program fee plus other expenses actually incurred toward attainment of the
certification shall be limited to no more than 115 combined total for the first fiscal year beginning July 1,
2008, with an additional 115 allowable each fiscal year thereafter. The eligible professional personnel
eligible for reimbursement shall be determined each fiscal year by ranking and verification as specified in
section 23.3.b. The total number of professional personnel reimbursed in any fiscal year is dependent
upon the available funding through legislative appropriation for that fiscal year, but shall not exceed 115
in any fiscal year. Recognition of only one advanced certification shall be allowed for any individual for
the purpose of obtaining the fee reimbursement and/or the salary supplement.

23.3.d. Reimbursement and Salary Supplement Schedule. Beginning July 1, 2008, 115
professional personnel as defined in W. Va. Code §18A-1-1 who hold advanced certification by ASHA,
NBCC, WVBEC, NASP, or NBCSN, and employed in the West Virginia public schools, shall be granted an
annual salary supplement of $2,500.00 for the life of the advanced certification, or for 10 years for any
one certification, whichever expires first, with an additional 115 professional personnel allowable every
fiscal year thereafter. Additionally, beginning July 1, 2008, 115 professional personnel as defined in W. Va.
Code §18A-1-1 are eligible for reimbursement of one-half of the fee for advanced certification upon
enrollment, and upon attainment of the advanced certification are eligible for reimbursement of the
remaining one-half of the fee, plus other expenses actually incurred which are not to exceed $600.00
maximum, toward attainment of the advanced certification, with reimbursement for an additional 115
professional personnel allowable every fiscal year thereafter.

23.3.e. Deadlines. Applications shall be accepted annually from January 1 through September
15 for processing for SLPs, counselors, school psychologists and school nurses. Applications received after
the September 15 deadline through December 31 shall be automatically denied for reimbursement and
salary supplement. Beginning January 1 annually, applications received by the September 15 deadline for
that year will be reviewed and ranked according to the criteria in this section to identify the 115 additional
applications eligible for payment during that year. Only candidates employed in West Virginia public
schools as an SLP, counselor, school psychologist, or school nurse are eligible for the reimbursement or
salary supplement.

23.3.f. Procedures for requesting National Certification Reimbursements. Eligible professional
personnel who enroll in, or complete, the initial ASHA, NBCC, WVBEC, NASP, or NBCSN certification is
eligible to apply for reimbursement of one-half of the program fee for enrollment and one-half of the fee
for completion, a maximum of $600.00 for extra expenses incurred for the initial certification, as specified
in the IRS guidelines, by applying for reimbursement and submitting documentation of the
following: payment verification of the advanced certification program fee(s); verification that the
candidate is enrolled in, or has completed, the advanced certification process; a copy of the ASHA, NBCC,
WVBEC, NASP, or NBCSN advanced certificate and other official documentation, as needed, verifying the

94
