126CSR136

4.64. Renewal. The extension of the certificate’s validity period under conditions set forth in WVBE
policies.

4.65. Revocation. The termination of all rights and privileges of licensure or certification as imposed
by a consent agreement or by a written decision issued after a hearing.

4.66. School Year. July 1 through June 30.

4.67. Semester Hour of College Credit. The unit of credit recognized for renewal of any certificate
and/or advanced salary classification.

4.68. Short-Term Substitute. A licensed educator who temporarily replaces a person assigned to an
education position for 30 consecutive instructional days or less.

4.68.a. Restricted Short-Term Substitute. A licensed educator who temporarily replaces a
person assigned to an educational position, for a county with an approved substitute shortage waiver by
the State Superintendent for ten consecutive instructional days or less.

4.69. Shortage Area. An endorsement area identified by the county superintendent as an area the
county does not have fully certified candidates for a position.

4.70. Specialization. The specific teaching, administrative, or student support services assignment a
certificate or permit holder is authorized to perform within West Virginia public schools as set forth in
Appendix A.

4.71. State Board. The West Virginia Board of Education (WVBE) invested with the general
supervision of free schools in the State (W. Va. Const. Article XII §2).

4.72. State Superintendent. The person appointed by the WVBE (W. Va. Code §18-3-1) responsible
for the general supervision of free schools and the administration of the WVDE.

4.73. Suspension. A temporary termination of all rights and privileges of licensure or certification
for a specified time period, or until certain conditions are met, as imposed by a consent agreement or a
written decision after a hearing.

4.74. Teacher. Shall mean the same as defined in W. Va. Code §18-1-1.

4.75. Teaching Experience. Full-Time classroom teaching or student support services experience
within the specialization(s) and grade level(s) reflected on the educator’s certificate in a public or
non-public school that has been accredited through a WVBE-approved accreditation agency (W. Va.
126CSR13C)}, Policy 2330, Non-public School Accreditation (Policy 2330).

4.76. Valid Administrative/Management Experience. Any work experience shall include full-time
assignment(s) in a public school system or managing a program related to the public school system where
the candidate was a school, district, or state-level administrator where duties required supervision and
evaluation of employees.
