126CSR136

4.30. Denial for Cause. A denial based on a candidate not meeting the criteria for licensure (W. Va.
Code §18A-3-1(i)), which specifies that a certificate shall not be issued to any person who is not of good
moral character and physically, mentally, and emotionally qualified to perform the duties for which the
certification would be issued.

4.31. Division of Motor Vehicles (DMV). The West Virginia government agency established in W.
Va. Code §17-A-1 or its equivalent in other states.

4.32. Doctorate. A doctoral degree, from an accredited IHE approved to offer doctorate degrees,
which has been issued to, or for which the requirements have been met by, a person who qualifies for, or
holds, a Professional Certificate or its equivalent.

4.33. Duplicate Credit. A credit that substantially includes the same content for which the person
has received previous credit.

4.34. Early Childhood Classroom Assistant Teacher (ECCAT) Paraprofessional Certificate. A person
who has completed the permanent authorization requirements and holds a paraprofessional certificate.

4.35. Early Childhood Classroom Assistant Teacher (ECCAT) Permanent Authorization. A person who
has completed the minimum requirements for a state-awarded certificate for ECCAT that meets or
exceeds the requirements for a child development associate (CDA).

4.36. Early Childhood Classroom Assistant Teacher (ECCAT) Temporary Authorization. A person who
has not met the minimum requirements for the permanent authorization requirements but is employed
in an ECCAT position and is currently enrolled and/or progressing toward meeting the permanent
authorization requirements.

4.37. Educator or Professional Educator. Shall mean the same as a teacher as defined in W. Va. Code
§18-1-1.

4.38. Endorsement. The specialization(s) and grade level(s) appearing on any certificate which
designate the program areas to which the holder can be assigned within the public schools of West
Virginia.

4.39. Experience. A professional assignment consistent with the endorsement(s) identified on the
educator’s certificate(s).

4.40. Fee. For purpose of tuition reimbursement only, in accordance with W. Va. Code §18A-3-3a,
includes any mandatory cost associated with tuition assessed by an IHE excluding costs associated with
books, technology, and/or supplies.

4.41. Good Faith Eligibility. For purposes of certification application and effective date of
certificates, is the allotted time period, not exceeding three school months, when an applicant has met all
certification requirements but has not received the required documentation to support the submitted
application, except when the WVDE’s review of the application requires additional processing time that
causes the allotted good faith eligibility time to be exceeded.
