126CSR136

9.1. General Requirements. A certificate to work in of West Virginia public schools may be issued
to acandidate who is: a United States citizen or who holds a valid Permanent Resident Card, Employment
Authorization Document (EAD), or work permit issued by the United States Citizenship and Immigration
Services (USCIS); of good moral character; physically, mentally, and emotionally qualified to perform
assigned duties; and, has attained the age of 18 on or before October 1 of the year in which the certificate
is issued unless otherwise noted (W. Va. Code §18A-3-2a).

9.2. Criminal History Record and Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) Fingerprint Background Check
Requirement for Initial Licensure. All candidates who apply to the WVDE for initial licensure, or those who
were issued a credential prior to January 1, 2001, and their license has expired, shall be fingerprinted by
the West Virginia State Police or its designee. The fingerprints shall be analyzed by the State Police for a
state criminal history record check through the central abuse registry record and then forwarded to the
FBI for a national criminal history record check. Information contained in either the central abuse registry
record or the FBI record may be the basis for the denial of a certificate for cause (W. Va. Code §18A-3-2a)
and/or W. Va. Code §18A-3-10.

9.3. State Analysis for Employment within 90 Days. Within 90 days of the state fingerprint analysis,
and after receiving written consent from the candidate, the WVDE may provide a copy of the results of a
state analysis to the county board(s) of education where the candidate is applying for employment
without additional cost to the candidate.

9.4. Disclosure Provisions. Information and/or documents maintained by the WVDE, or a county
board of education obtained (W. Va. Code §18A-3-10) is exempt from disclosure under the Freedom of
Information Act established in W. Va. Code §29B-1-4. The disclosure or publication of information in a
statistical or other format that does not include personally identifiable information is permissible.

9.5. Beginning Educator Internship/Induction. An educator who receives an initial Professional
Teaching Certificate after January 1, 1992, must successfully complete a Beginning Educator
Internship/Induction. Provided, an educator who has successfully completed five years of out-of-state
full-time teaching experience is exempt from completing the Beginning Educator Internship/Induction
required by W. Va. Code §18A-3C-3. A candidate with five years of in-state full-time teaching experience
at an eligible school, as defined in this policy, where a mentor was not provided during the first year of
full-time employment with supporting documentation from the county employer shall be exempt.

9.6. Licensure and Related Fees. A non-refundable processing fee, established by the WVBE, shall
be assessed for all applications. In addition to the processing fee, candidates who apply for an initial
certificate are responsible for the current fee(s) assessed by the FBI for conducting a fingerprint
background check and a West Virginia Criminal Bureau of Investigation fingerprint background check as
required by W. Va. Code §18A-3-10. The WVDE shall also assess a fee for copies of records.

9.7. Dating of Certificates. All certificates shall be issued and dated in accordance with all relevant
laws and WVBE policies. A county board of education may employ a candidate for a professional
educator’s certificate in good faith that the candidate is eligible for a certificate for up to three school
months, unless otherwise noted, or the notification date of the candidate’s ineligibility, whichever occurs
first. This three-month period shall begin on the hiring date for that position. The candidate’s background
check requirements shall be completed and the candidate’s application and assessed fees for licensure
must be received by the WVDE within 10 calendar days of the hiring date. The certificate effective date
shall be the same date it was received by the WVDE or the applicant’s hire/assignment date, not to exceed

17
