126CSR136

W. Va. Code §61-2-1, or a conviction under any law of the United States or any other state for an offense
with the same elements as those offenses described in W. Va. Code §61-2-1; or, having been adjudicated
by a court of competent jurisdiction as having committed abuse of a child under W. Va. Code §49-4-601.

4.10. Automatic Suspension. The immediate suspension of all rights and privileges of a teacher
licensure or certification as provided for by W. Va. Code §18A-3-6(b) as a result of: a charge or indictment
for an offense under W. Va. Code §61-8D-3 or §61-8D-5 or comparable statute in any other state; a charge
or indictment for any criminal offense that requires the teacher or certificate holder to register as a sex
offender; a charge or indictment with any criminal offense which has as an element of delivery or
distribution of a controlled substance; a charge or indictment for any offense under W. Va. Code §61-2-1
or under any law of the United States or any other state for an offense which has the same elements as
the offenses described in W. Va. Code §61-2-1; or having been alleged to have committed abuse of a child
in a petition filed (W. Va. Code §49-4-601).

4.11. Bachelor’s Degree (BA). A bachelor’s degree from an accredited IHE which has been issued to,
or for which the requirements for a bachelor’s degree have been met by, a candidate who qualifies for,
or holds, a Professional Certificate or its equivalent.

4.12. Bachelor's Degree plus 15 (BA+15). A bachelor’s degree from an accredited IHE plus 15
semester hours of approved coursework through an accredited IHE, approved to offer graduate credit,
met by a candidate who qualifies for, or holds, a Professional Certificate or its equivalent.

4.13. Beginning Educator. A classroom teacher with less than two years of teaching experience.

4.14, Beginning Educator Internship/Induction. A comprehensive system of support for classroom
teachers designed to assist the educator during the first year(s) of employment by providing a mentor,
academic coach, or other professional support personnel or programs to guide the candidate during the
transition to a new job assignment and promote professional growth, in accordance with W. Va. Code
§18A-3C-3.

4.15. Career Technical Education (CTE) Bachelor’s Degree plus 15 (BA+15). The completion of the
coursework for issuance of a CTE Certificate plus an additional 15 semester hours of approved coursework
from an accredited IHE.

4.16. Career Technical Education (CTE) Master’s Degree (MA). The completion of the coursework
for issuance of a CTE Certificate plus 30 semester hours of approved coursework from an accredited IHE.

4.17. Career Technical Education (CTE) Master’s Degree plus 15 (MA+15). The completion of the
coursework for issuance of a CTE Certificate plus an additional 45 semester hours of approved coursework
from an accredited IHE.

4.18. Career Technical Education (CTE) Master’s Degree plus 30 (MA+30). The completion of the
coursework for issuance of a CTE Certificate plus an additional 60 semester hours of approved coursework
from an accredited IHE.

4.19. Career Technical Education (CTE) Master’s Degree plus 45 (MA+45). The completion of the
coursework for issuance of the CTE Certificate plus an additional 75 semester hours of approved
coursework from an accredited IHE.
