126CSR136

holding a Provisional Administrative Certificate may be employed as an administrator in a West Virginia
public school but is not permitted to perform evaluations until the candidate holds an initial
Administrative Certification with the completion of the ELI.

16.4.d. Permanent Administrative Certificate. A candidate who holds a Permanent
Administrative Certification on a valid out-of-state certification is eligible for a West Virginia Provisional
Administrative Certificate upon employment in an administrative role; completion of the comprehensive
ELI; and, verification of five years of experience acquired under a valid certificate.

16.5. Issuance of a West Virginia Professional Certificate based on a valid, out-of-state certificate. A
candidate holding a valid out-of-state certificate may only use the out-of-state certificate once for the
issuance of a West Virginia certificate.

16.6. Military Spouse. A Temporary Teaching Certificate, or eligible permit for an armed forces
spouse, may be issued to a candidate that submits documentation that they meet the following criteria:
is married to a member of the armed forces of the United States who is on active duty; or, holds a current
unencumbered teaching certificate, license or permit issued by an equivalent credentialing entity in
another state, territory, or protectorate of the United States.

16.6.a. Conditions of issuance. A candidate applying for licensure is required to submit
documentation that they meet the following criteria: their spouse is assigned to a duty station in West
Virginia or at a military installation within 50 air miles of a West Virginia border; has been offered
employment in a West Virginia public school; holds a minimum of a four-year degree from an accredited
institution; holds a valid credential from another state; and, passes a West Virginia State Police and FBI
criminal history record check (W. Va. Code §18A-3-10). The candidate may be issued an equivalent
credential if one exists.

16.6.b. Validity Period. A Temporary Professional Teaching Certificate or eligible permit issued
to a military spouse shall be valid in accordance with the allowable validity period for the issued credential
and adherence to the renewal requirements of the specific credential as required by the applicable section
of this policy.

§126-136-17. Non-United States Citizen.

17.1. A professional, initial, or eligible certificate may be issued to a non-citizen of the United States
who holds a valid Permanent Resident Card, Employment Authorization Document (EAD), or work permit
issued by the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS).

17.2. Permit for Non-United States Citizen.

17.2.a. General Criteria. W. Va. Code §18A-3-2a, An Exchange/Visiting teacher who is a non-
United States citizen and participates in a program or exchange recognized and/or approved by the WVDE
may be issued a Non-United States Citizen Permit.

17.2.b. Conditions of issuance. An Eligible candidate applying for a Non-United States Citizen
must hold a valid Permanent Resident Card, Employment Authorization Document (EAD), or work permit
issued by the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) (W. Va. Code §18A-3-1), and
submit documentation that they meet the following criteria:

81
