126CSR136

CTE specializations. A county board of education may utilize these individuals in accordance with a locally
adopted policy provided they do not replace a licensed educator.

18.6. Assignment of Elementary or Multi-subjects Teachers. An educator who holds a valid West
Virginia Professional Teaching Certificate endorsed for Multi-subjects K-8 may be assigned to teach in
departmentalized settings in grades six through eight without holding the content specialization for the
educator’s assignment for English, General Science, and Social Studies. An educator assigned to teach
mathematics in grades seven and/or eight must hold the Middle School Mathematics Authorization.

18.7. Assignment of Long-Term Substitutes. A person who holds a Long-Term Substitute Permit may
serve as a short-term substitute in any teaching area or in a position for more than 30 consecutive
instructional days in the endorsement area reflected on the Long-Term Substitute Permit.

18.8. Assignment of Short-Term Substitutes. A substitute who fills a position for 30 consecutive
instructional days or less (short-term) may substitute in a specialization not reflected on their certificate.
Individuals who hold a Clinical Experience Permit, a Restricted Clinical Experience Permit, or a Long-Term
Year-Long Residency Permit may be employed as a substitute once they complete the necessary
requirements in accordance with Policy 5100. A retired CTE instructor holding a valid CTE Certificate may
be employed as a Short-Term Substitute in their program of study.

18.9. Assignment of Speech Language Pathologist. An educator licensed as a speech/language
pathologist grade K-12 is authorized to provide services to students in grade level(s) pre-k-Adult, provided
the educator applies and is issued an Authorization for grades pre-k-Adult.

18.10. Assignment of English as a Second Language Teacher. An English as a Second Language (ESL)
teacher is authorized to: deliver the instructional support to a student with English Learners (EL), whose
assessment indicates the instructional goals and objectives can be delivered in a regular education
program with support for the ESL teacher; provide support to the regular classroom teacher by assisting
in the modification of the curriculum, methods, and material to accommodate the EL student who is
included in the regular education program; or, deliver the state-approved content standards in the
general education program or alternative language program to students with severely limited English
proficiency when the student’s assessment indicates the student would benefit by a placement that
provides one-on-one and/or small group instruction, and modification of the curriculum, methods,
materials and techniques or concentrate on the development of the EL student’s reading, writing,
listening, and speaking skills. When an ESL teacher delivers the state-approved content standards in the
general education program, the educator must collaborate with the appropriate teachers to ensure that
the EL student is instructed using the state-approved content standards in the general education program.

18.11. Assignment of School Nutrition Director. Beginning with assignments made for the 2002-
2003 school year, an individual assigned as a School Nutrition Director must hold a Temporary
Authorization endorsed for School Nutrition Director.

18.12. Assignment of Adult Education Teachers. Persons assigned as an Adult (Basic) Education
Teacher must hold a valid Adult Certificate endorsed for Adult Basic Education or a Professional Teaching
Certificate, or its equivalent.

18.13. Assignment of Speech Assistant. A Speech Assistant shall conduct only specific components

of a speech and language delivery program under the direction and guidance of a certified SLP. A Speech

83
