126CSR136

general requirements including the minimum GPA in accordance with section 9, unless otherwise noted;
and, satisfies the conditions for issuance in accordance with section 11.

11.3.a.1. WVBE-approved non-IHE EPPs. A two-year, non-renewable First-Class/Full-Time
Permit for Professional Teaching may be issued to a candidate currently employed or who has been hired
as the most qualified candidate in a county that does not have fully certified candidates for the position
in a specific assignment and has completed a minimum of a BA through an accredited |HE; is enrolled and
continuously completing coursework through the WVBE-approved EPP; is in good standing in a WVBE-
approved EPP; meets the general requirements specified in section 9, meets the minimum GPA
requirements in accordance with section 9, unless otherwise specified in the directory, section 12.3 and,
is recommended for a First-Class/Full-Time Permit for Professional Teaching and Student Support
Personnel by the county superintendent. Criteria of the West Virginia Licensure Testing Directory for pre-
professional skills and content testing or exemption(s) is required to be met before a WVBE-approved
non-IHE EPP non-renewable First-Class/Full-Time Permit may be issued.

11.3.a.2. Exception for a School Nurse. A school nurse who is employed on a First-Class/Full-
Time Permit, Authorization for School Nurse, Temporary Nurse Certificate, or Nurse Certificate is not
required to hold a BA; however, the candidate is required to submit documentation that they earned a
Nursing Diploma or AA in Nursing and hold a valid RN license issued by the West Virginia Registered Nurse
Board. The WVDE shall review the current status of any disciplinary action prior to issuance of the permit.
The candidate is required to complete a Bachelor of Science in Nursing (BSN) from an accredited IHE within
five years of being issued a First-Class/Full-Time Permit for Professional Teaching and Student Support
Personnel. The candidate is required to submit the Professional Commitment form approved by the
county of employment and an IHE. A candidate issued a First-Class/Full-Time Permit for Professional
Teaching and Student Support Personnel are also required to complete a minimum of six semester hours
annually towards the completion of a BSN degree. All requirements for the BSN degree must be met
within five years of the original issuance of the First-Class/Full-Time Permit for Professional Teaching and
Student Support Personnel.

11.3.a.3. Driver Education. A candidate issued a First-Class/Full-Time Permit or Out-of-Field
Authorization for Driver Education is authorized to provide only classroom instruction and is prohibited
from instructing the students during the in-car driving practice. A candidate holding this credential shall
report any moving violations, including a DUI, to the WVDE within 7 days of the incident.

11.3.b. Conditions for Issuance. A candidate for the First-Class/Full-Time Permit for Professional
Teaching and Student Support Personnel is required to submit documentation that they meet the
following criteria:

11.3.b.1. College/University Coursework. For all endorsement areas the candidate must be
enrolled in coursework in a program leading to licensure in the endorsement area at an accredited IHE,,
except school psychologist and school counseling, the designated official of the IHE or the WVBE-approved
educator preparation program where the candidate is enrolled is required to verify that the candidate has
completed a minimum of 25 percent or six semester hours, whichever is greater, of the state-approved
program in the specialization(s) for which the permit is requested.

11.3.b.1.A. WVBE-approved non-lHE EPPs. Non-degree programs reflected on an official
transcript are exempt from the 25 percent program completion requirement.

41
