126CSR136

with the online Initial ELI but is not eligible to conduct evaluations until the educator is issued an Initial
Professional Administrative Certificate.

10.2.a.2. Validity Period. The Provisional Administrative Certificate is valid for five school
years and expires on June 30 of the last year of its validity.

10.2.a.3. Renewal of a Provisional Administrative Certificate.
10.2.a.3.A. Renewal of a Provisional Administrative Certificate valid for one year.

10.2.a.3.A.1. Three semester hours of coursework from an accredited IHE with a
minimum 3.00 GPA in each course related to public education or WVDE WVLearns courses completed
subsequent to the issuance of the certificate being renewed and within the five-year period immediately
preceding the date of application; and

10.2.a.3.A.2. Recommendation. If the candidate is currently employed by a county
board of education, multi-county CTE center, or WVSDT, the candidate must be recommended for
renewal by the employing county superintendent. If the educator is not employed by a county board of
education, then the educator must secure a recommendation from a personal or professional reference
that is not related to, nor residing in the same household as, the candidate.

10.2.a.3.B. Renewal of a Provisional Administrative Certificate valid for five years.

10.2.a.3.B.1. Six semester hours of coursework from an accredited |IHE with a
minimum 3.00 GPA in each course related to public education or WVDE WVLearns courses completed
subsequent to the issuance of the certificate being renewed and within the five-year period immediately
preceding the date of application; or an MA+30 for salary classification based on the awarding of a MA;
or has reached the minimum of 60 years old; and

10.2.a.3.B.2. Recommendation. If the candidate is currently employed by a county
board of education, multi-county CTE center, or WVSDT, the candidate must be recommended for
renewal by the employing county superintendent. If the educator is not employed by a county board of
education, then the educator must secure a recommendation from a personal or professional reference
that is not related to, nor residing in the same household as, the candidate.

10.2.b. Initial Professional Administrative Certificate.

10.2.b.1. General Criteria. An initial Professional Administrative Certificate may be issued to
a candidate who meets the following criteria: holds the minimum degree specified in Appendix A through
an accredited IHE; the general requirements specified in section 9; the minimum GPA in accordance with
section 9.11; three years of valid administrative/management level or teaching experience in accordance
with section 4; the Comprehensive Educator Leadership Institute (ELI) in evaluation skills offered through
WVDE or equivalent training approved by the WVBE; and employment as an Administrator, Supervisor of
Instruction, or Superintendent for a West Virginia county board of education within 90 days of
employment, and the conditions for issuance in accordance with section 10.2.b.2. An initial Professional
Administrative Certificate authorizes the certificate holder to be employed as a Superintendent, Principal,
and/or General Instruction Supervisor in specialization(s) and grade level(s) endorsed on the certificate in
public schools.

28
