126CSR136

6.2.b.2. Any county superintendent, public school principal, or public charter school
administrator who knows of any acts on the part of any teacher/certificate holder for which a certificate
may be revoked or for which other actions may be taken in accordance with W. Va. Code §18A-3-6(a)-(f)
shall report this information together with all the facts and evidence, to the State Superintendent for such
action as in the State Superintendent’s judgment may be proper.

6.2.b.2.A. The State Superintendent shall periodically ensure that county
superintendents, public school principals, and public charter school administrators are complying with
reporting requirements.

6.2.b.3. The State Superintendent may automatically suspend the certificate held by a
teacher or certificate holder in any of the following circumstances:

6.2.b.3.A. The teacher or certificate holder is charged or indicted for an offense under W.
Va. Code §61-8D-3 or §61-8D-5 or a comparable statute in any other state;

6.2.b.3.B. The teacher or certificate holder is charged with, or indicted for, any criminal
offense that requires the teacher or certificate holder to register as a sex offender;

6.2.b.3.C. The teacher or certificate holder is charged with or indicted for any criminal
offense which has an element of delivery or distribution of a controlled substance;

6.2.b.3.D. The teacher or certificate holder is charged with, or indicted for, any offense
under W. Va. Code §61-2-1, or under any law of the United States, or any other state for an offense which
has the same elements as the offenses established in W. Va. Code §61-2-1; or

6.2.b.3.E. A petition has been filed (W. Va. Code §49-4-601) alleging that the teacher or
certificate holder has committed abuse of a child.

6.2.b.4. If any such charge or indictment resulting in suspension pursuant to section 6.2.b.3.
is dismissed by the court in which it is pending, if the teacher or certificate holder is acquitted of such
charge, or if a petition filed (W. Va. Code §49-4-601) and resulting in suspension pursuant to section
6.2.b.3 is dismissed by the court in which it is pending, the teacher’s or certificate holder’s certification
shall be reinstated unless otherwise prohibited by law.

6.2.b.5. The State Superintendent shall automatically revoke the certificates held by a teacher
or certificate holder in any of the following circumstances:

6.2.b.5.A. The teacher or certificate holder pleads guilty to or is convicted of an offense
under W. Va. Code §61-8D-3 or §61-8D-5 or a comparable statute in any other state;

6.2.b.5.B. The teacher or certification holder pleads guilty to or is convicted of any
criminal offense that requires the teacher or certificate holder to register as a sex offender;

6.2.b.5.C. The teacher or certificate holder pleads guilty to or is convicted of any criminal
offense which has as an element delivery or distribution of a controlled substance;

12
