126CSR136

specialization(s) for which West Virginia licensure is requested and three years of successful out-of-state
experience as an educator within the seven years immediately preceding the date of application;

10.4.b.2.A. Industry Recognized Credentials. For each CTE program of study, the
alternatively certified teacher hired after June 18, 2003, is required to: hold and maintain the industry
recognized credential if the credential is recognized; and attain additional certification or endorsements
required by the credentialing agency for the program of study the alternatively certified teacher is
currently teaching; and pass the testing requirements specified in the West Virginia CTE Endorsement and
Testing Manual, if applicable; and,

10.4.b.2.B. Recommendation. If the candidate is currently employed by a county board
of education, multi-county CTE center, or WVSDT, the candidate must be recommended for a CTE
Certificate by the employing county superintendent. If the educator is not employed by a county board
of education, then the educator must secure a recommendation from a personal or professional reference
that is not related to, nor residing in the same household as, the candidate.

10.4.b.3. Validity Period. The CTE Certificate shall be valid for not more than five years and
expires on June 30 of the last year of its validity.

10.4.b.4. Additional Endorsements for Existing Career Technical Education (CTE) Certificates.
A candidate who already holds a valid West Virginia CTE Certificate endorsed as specified in the West
Virginia CTE Endorsement and Testing Manual may apply for additional endorsements by submitting
documentation that the certificate holder has acquired the appropriate wage-earning work experience;
passed required state exam(s) for the endorsement(s) the candidate has applied to be included on their
CTE Certificate; and, holds valid industry credential(s), if applicable.

10.4.b.5. Renewal of the CTE Certificate. A candidate for licensure is required to submit
documentation that they meet the following criteria:

10.4.b.5.A. Coursework. Six semester hours of appropriate college/university coursework
reflecting a 3.00 GPA related to public education, as defined in section 9.10, or WVLearns courses through
the WVDE. The coursework must have been completed after the issuance of the certificate being renewed
and within the five-year period immediately preceding the date of application; or hold a minimum of an
MA and a minimum salary classification (professional or CTE) of an MA+30; or is a minimum of 60 years
old; and

10.4.b.5.B. Industry Recognized Credentials. A valid industry credential is required for
renewal of the CTE Certificate as prescribed by the West Virginia CTE Endorsement and Testing Manual;
and,

10.4.b.5.C. Recommendation. If the candidate is currently employed by a county board
of education, multi-county CTE center, or WVSDT, the candidate must be recommended for renewal by
the employing county superintendent. If the educator is not employed by a county board of education,
then the educator must secure a recommendation from a personal or professional reference that is not
related to, nor residing in the same household as, the candidate.

10.4.b.5.C.1. | Recognition of Out-of-State CTE Certificates. A CTE Certificate for
employment in a West Virginia pubic school may be issued to an eligible out-of-state candidate that

36
