126CSR136

11.4.d. Renewal of the Restricted First-Class/Full-Time Permit for Professional Teaching and
Student Support Personnel for individuals who continue to be employed in the specialization(s) reflected
on the permit is required to submit documentation that they meet the following criteria: completion of
six semester hours of required coursework from, or approved by, the accredited IHE where the candidate
is completing the approved licensure program reflecting a minimum 3.00 GPA towards the approved
program, or a BSN degree; the Professional Commitment form verifying the candidate’s enrollment in the
state-approved program or currently completing the BSN program; and, be recommended by the county
superintendent verifying that the candidate is the most qualified for the position.

11.4.e. Conversion of a Restricted First-Class/Full-Time Permit to a First-Class/Full-Time Permit.
In order to qualify for a First-Class/Full-Time Permit a candidate is required to meet the minimum GPA
requirement in accordance with section 9.

11.5. First-Class/Full-Time Permit for CTE.

11.5.a. General Criteria. A First Class/Full-Time Permit for teaching in a CTE secondary or adult
program may be issued to a candidate who holds a high school diploma, a state-approved high school
equivalency, or a degree, if applicable, through an accredited IHE, and meets the general requirements in
accordance with section 9; and the conditions for issuance in accordance with section 11.4. All
requirements shall be met within five years of the original issuance of the permit.

11.5.b. Conditions for Issuance. A candidate for the First-Class/Full-Time Permit for CTE is
required to submit documentation that they meet the following requirements and the content specific
requirements for issuance specified in the West Virginia CTE Endorsement and Testing Manual.

11.5.b.1. Verification of the required work experience from the current or a former
employer(s) as specified in the West Virginia CTE Endorsement and Testing Manual; and, verification of
registration in the approved CTE preparation program; and, if applicable, hold and maintain the industry
recognized credential, for each specialization, required for alternatively certified teachers employed after
June 18, 2003, specified in the West Virginia CTE Endorsement and Testing Manual; and be recommended
for a First-Class/Full-Time Permit for CTE by the employing county superintendent, Multi-County CTE
Administrator, or WVSDT Superintendent or designee, based on the candidate being hired as the most
qualified candidate for the position.

11.5.c. Validity Period. The First-Class/Full-Time Permit for CTE is valid for one school year and
expires on June 30. An educator employed on or after January 1, may be issued a First-Class/Full-Time
Permit for CTE valid until June 30 of the following school year. The purpose of this provision is to allow a
candidate to complete required coursework prior to applying for an initial CTE certificate.

11.5.d. Renewal of the First-Class/Full-Time Permit for CTE for individuals who continue
employment are required to submit documentation that they meet the following criteria: passage of the
testing requirements specified in the West Virginia CTE Endorsement and Testing Manual, if applicable;
verification from the designated official of the educator preparation program that the candidate has
completed two courses or six semester credit hours of state-approved educator prep program coursework
holds a valid industry credential as specified in the West Virginia CTE Endorsement and Testing Manual ,
if applicable; and be recommended for renewal by the employing county superintendent, Multi-County
CTE Administrator, or WVSDT Superintendent or designee, based on the candidate being hired as the
most qualified candidate for the position.

44
