126CSR136

11.12.f. Exception. Individuals who possess a valid Junior Reserve Officers’ Training Corps
(JROTC) Authorization or Professional CTE Certificate are not required to complete the Sports First Aid,
Coaching Principles, or the WVSSAC course to be issued an authorization to coach.

11.12.g. Continued Employment. A coach previously authorized without holding a high school
diploma or passing an WVBE-approved high school equivalency exam is exempt from meeting high school
diploma or equivalency requirement if their coaching service has been continuous.

11.12.h. WVSSAC Coursework. A certified coach that has only completed the Sports First Aid
and the Coaching Principles courses whose certificate was not renewed for the academic year after the
certificate expired must complete the WVSSAC coursework before their authorization may be renewed.

11.12.i. Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR) and Automated External Defibrillator (AED)
Training. For issuance of any Coaching, Limited Sports Training, and Athletic Training Authorizations, all
individuals who serve as sports personnel, including any licensed educators or professional personnel who
may not hold such authorizations, shall complete CPR and AED training provided, or authorized, by the
county board of education where the individual is employed. Individuals shall maintain this training
current and valid as required by the county board of education policy effective at the time of each
renewal.

11.12.j.. Renewal of the Authorization for Coaching. A candidate applying for a renewal is
required to submit documentation that they meet the following criteria:

11.12.j.1. Employed under a contract with a county board of education to serve as a coach or
approved by the county board of education to be a volunteer coach;

11.12.j.2.. Recommended for renewal by the county superintendent based on the candidate
being the most qualified candidate for the position; and,

11.12.j.3. Meet requirements in accordance with section 11.11.a. An authorization issued
for coaching is effective on the employment/assignment start date provided on the application or the
date that the application was received by the WVDE, whichever is later.

11.12.k. Permanent Authorization for Grade Modification. A candidate applying for a
Permanent Authorization for Grade Modification is required to submit documentation that they meet the
following criteria: holds a valid certificate reflecting an eligible professional endorsement(s) specified in
Appendix A; and is recommended for the authorization by the employing county superintendent.

11.12.1. Initial Authorization for Jobs for West Virginia Graduates Program. A candidate applying
for an initial Authorization for Jobs for West Virginia Graduates Program is required to submit
documentation that they meet the following criteria: holds a minimum of a BA from an accredited IHE; is
employed as a teacher in the Jobs for West Virginia Graduates Program; and, recommended for the
authorization by the employing county superintendent.

11.12.11. Authorization for Jobs for West Virginias Graduates Program Renewals. <A
candidate applying for renewal is required to submit documentation that they meet the following criteria:
is employed as a teacher in the Jobs for West Virginia’s Graduates Program; and, is recommended for
renewal by the employing county superintendent.

61
