126CSR136

computer related systems or technologies. All individuals working as a TSS are required to hold an
authorization. The Temporary Authorization for TSS is valid for one year and expires on June 30 and may
only be renewed once. A candidate for an initial Temporary Authorization for Technology Systems
Specialist is required to provide documentation that they meet the following criteria: Holds a minimum
of an AA from an accredited IHE; and be recommended for an initial Temporary Authorization for
Technology Systems Specialist from the employing county superintendent.

11,12.t.1. Renewal of the Temporary Authorization for TSS. A candidate for renewal is
required to provide documentation that they are making satisfactory progress toward completing all
training required by the employing county; and, be recommended for renewal by the employing county
superintendent.

11.12.u. Permanent Authorization for TSS. A candidate for a Permanent Authorization for TSS
is required to provide documentation that they meet the following criteria: holds a minimum of an AA
from an accredited IHE; complete all training required by the employing county; and be recommended by
the employing county superintendent.

11.12.v. Permanent Authorization for Computer Science Discoveries. A candidate for a
Permanent Authorization for Computer Science Discoveries is required to provide documentation that
they meet the following criteria: holds a valid Professional Teaching Certificate or CTE Certificate,
completion of a minimum of 60 hours of WVDE-approved professional development learning; and, be
recommended by the employing county superintendent.

11.12.w. Permanent Authorization for Introduction to Computer Science. A candidate for a
Permanent Authorization for Introduction to Computer Science is required to submit documentation that
they meet the following: holds a valid Professional Teaching Certificate or CTE Certificate; completion of
a minimum of 60 hours of WVDE-approved professional development learning; and, be recommended for
a Permanent Authorization for Introduction to Computer Science by the employing county
superintendent.

11.12.x. Permanent Authorization for Computer Science Fundamentals. A candidate for a
Permanent Authorization for Computer Science Fundamentals is required to submit documentation that
they meet the following criteria: holds a valid Professional Teaching Certificate; completion of a minimum
of 50 hours of WVDE-approved professional development learning; and, be recommended for a
Permanent Authorization for Computer Science Fundamentals by the employing county superintendent.

11.12.y. Permanent Authorization for Career Technical Education Administrator. A candidate
for a Permanent Authorization for Career Technical Education Administrator is required to provide
documentation that they meet the following criteria: Has a current Principal endorsement on their
professional certificate; successful completion of the state-approved CTE Administrator coursework;
completion of a minimum of three years teaching or school level administrator experience and, be
recommended for a Permanent Authorization for Career Technical Education Administrator by the
employing Superintendent, Multi-County CTE Administrator, or WVSDT Superintendent or designee.

11.12.z. Initial Temporary Authorization for Career Technical Education (CTE) Administrator. A

candidate for an initial Temporary Authorization for CTE Administrator is required to provide
documentation that they meet the following criteria: has a current Principal endorsement on their

64
