126CSR136

9.11.a. For Issuance of an Original Certificate. A candidate for licensure is required to have a
minimum overall GPA of 2.50, unless otherwise noted. The scholastic requirements shall be computed
using the 4.0 scale including the discretionary academic forgiveness provisions approved by the higher
education governing boards.; or

9.11.a.1. the candidate meets any eligible exemption specified in the directory or the West
Virginia CTE Endorsement and Testing Manual;

9.11.a.2. must hold a minimum 2.50 GPA for all college/university coursework attempted
with a BA, or minimum 3.00 GPA if submitting an MA or a doctorate degree, with the exception of a
minimum 2.00 GPA required for the Substitute Permit and school nurses licensed by the West Virginia
Registered Nurse Board or the West Virginia State Board of Examiners for Licensed Practical Nurses. CTE
Teachers transitioning from business and industry to career technical education who meet the wage-
earning experience requirements but may/may not possess a bachelor’s degree may be exempt from GPA
requirements.

9.11.a.3. Candidates who hold a valid out-of-state teaching certificate with verification of five
years of successful full-time experience in a public school in the area(s) of endorsement reflected on the
certificate, which includes the state the certificate was issued in, are exempt from the GPA requirement.

9.11.a.4. A candidate who holds an MA or higher with a minimum 3.00 GPA meets the GPA
requirement, superseding the minimum GPA required for a BA.

9.11.b. For Issuance of Additional Endorsements. Additional endorsements may be issued to a
candidate who holds a West Virginia Professional Certificate, meets the 2.50 GPA requirement in the
area(s) the endorsement is requested, unless otherwise specified. All required and elective courses
completed for endorsement(s) shall be included in meeting GPA requirements, regardless of the
completion date.

9.11.c. For Renewal of a Certificate. College/university credit completed for the renewal of a
certificate is required to have a 3.00 GPA or meet the approved equivalent.

9.12. State Testing Requirements. All candidates for professional licensure or CTE certificate are
required to meet state testing requirements (W. Va. Code §18A-3-2a) and set forth in section 10.1.e and
the directory and the CTE Endorsement and Testing Manual, including the exemptions in W. Va. Code
§18A-3-2a(1)(B) and in section 10.1.e.

9.12.a. When tests, scores, or industry credentials listed in the manual are modified, the
validity period for the previously listed test, score, and/or industry credential shall be one year from the
effective date of the new test, score, or industry credential, except when the test creator specifies
otherwise. In those circumstances where the WVBE has not modified either the required test or the
passing score, the test and score shall remain valid beyond the ten-year period. Candidates whose test
score(s) exceed the ten-year validity period at the time of application for licensure are required to satisfy
current testing and passing score requirements.

19
