126CSR136

program; and the testing requirements for the new content specialization if a test is available. A
candidate holding an endorsement in programmatic level Pre-K-Pre-K or Pre-K-K must meet the minimum
proficiency levels for the current professional education assessment or have a minimum of five years full-
time teaching experience in a West Virginia public school under that license.

21.2. For issuance of an Additional Endorsement Based on Content Proficiency. A candidate holding
a valid West Virginia Professional Teaching Certificate, excluding the Provisional Alternative Certificate,
may apply for an additional endorsement in an additional area of certification by submitting
documentation that they meet the following criteria: had a passing score on the appropriate content area
test effective in current policy or was in the effective policy when the test was taken and has not been
removed from policy for over five years that is required of other teachers for certification in that area.
The exemptions established in section 10.1.e.2.A.1 are not applicable for the additional endorsement
based on content proficiency request.

21.3. Exceptions. An additional endorsement based on content proficiency in accordance with
section 21.2 may not be issued for a Professional Student Support Certificate, Professional Administrative
Certificate, or any Alternative Provisional Certificate.

21.4. For issuance of an Additional Endorsement for Driver Education. A candidate applying for an
additional endorsement for Driver Education is required to submit documentation that they meet the
following criteria:

21.4. a. compliance with the requirements established in section 10;

21.4.b. completion of an approved preparation program in driver education;

21.4.c. holds a valid West Virginia Professional Certificate;

21.4.d. has consistently held a valid motor vehicle operator’s license for the past five years;

21.4.e. has a satisfactory driving record verified by a certified copy of the candidate’s driving
record from the DMV in each state where the candidate was licensed during the past five years if a driving

record has not been submitted to the WVDE within the previous 30 days;

21.4.f. has not accumulated nine or more points on the candidate’s driving record from a DMV
during the past five years; and,

21.4.g. has not been convicted and/or the subject of a license suspension or revocation by a
DMV for a charge of operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, controlled substance,
any other drugs or the combination thereof, and has not operated a motor vehicle while under the
influence of the same as established by a preponderance of evidence including, but not limited to, breath
test results, blood test results, or field sobriety test results, notwithstanding the lack of a conviction or a
DMV suspension or revocation. A candidate holding this credential shall report any moving violations,
including a DUI, to the WVDE within 7 days of the incident.

21.4.h. Waivers are not applicable to section 21.4.

88
