126CSR136

10.3.b.3.B. Recommendation. If the candidate is currently employed by a county board
of education, multi-county CTE center, or WVSDT, the candidate must be recommended for renewal by
the employing county superintendent. If the educator is not employed by a county board of education,
then the educator must secure a recommendation from a personal or professional reference that is not
related to, nor residing in the same household as, the candidate.

10.3.c. Permanent Professional Student Support Certificate.

10.3.c.1. Conditions for Issuance. A candidate for licensure is required to submit
documentation that they meet the following criteria:

10.3.c.1.A. Holds, or will be eligible to hold a Professional Student Support Certificate
valid for three years or five years after January 1 of the year in which the three-year certificate was issued
expires; and holds a Master’s Degree related to public education as defined in section 9.10; and
completed five years of educational full-time teaching experience including two years in the
specialization(s) and one year minimum full-time in a West Virginia public school or an accredited private
school in accordance with Policy 2330, and six semester hours of coursework from an accredited IHE with
a minimum 3.00 GPA in each course related to public education or WVDE WVLearns courses completed
subsequent to the issuance of the certificate being renewed and within the five-year period immediately
preceding the date of application; or a Master’s +30 salary classification, or is minimum of 60 years old;
or,

10.3.c.1.B. Holds a Professional Support Certificate valid for five years each that has been
issued twice after January 1 of the year in which the five-year certificate was issued expires; and holds a
Bachelor’s Degree related to public education as defined in section 9.10; and completed five years of
educational full-time teaching experience including two years in the specialization(s) and one year
minimum full-time in a West Virginia public school or in an accredited private school in accordance with
Policy 2330, and six semester hours of coursework from an accredited IHE with a minimum 3.00 GPA in
each course related to public education or WVDE WVLearns courses completed subsequent to the
issuance of the certificate being renewed and within the five-year period immediately preceding the date
of application; or is minimum of 60 years old; or,

10.3.c.1.C. Holds a Five-Year Professional Student Certificate, a Master’s Degree, and
completed five years of educational full-time teaching experience including two years in the
specialization(s) and one year minimum full-time in a West Virginia public school or in an accredited
private school in accordance with Policy 2330, may apply for a Permanent Professional Student Support
Certificate after meeting experience requirements; or

10.3.c.1.D. Holds a valid out-of-state certificate that reflects permanent status by the
issuing state, verification of a minimum of five years of full-time experience in the endorsement area(s) is
required to be indicated on the valid certificate and in a public school setting, verified by the appropriate
licensing agency or system in accordance with section 16.

10.3.c.2. Validity Period. The Permanent Professional Student Support Certificate shall
remain valid unless it is surrendered, suspended, or revoked.

34
