126CSR136

troubled and disruptive youth in accordance with W. Va. 126CSR99, Policy 4373, Expected Behavior in
Safe and Supportive Schools (Policy 4373).

11.12.c.1. Renewal of the Authorization for Alternative Learning Setting Education. A
candidate applying for a renewal is required to submit documentation that they meet the following
criteria: holds a valid West Virginia Professional Teaching Certificate; and, is recommended for renewal
by the employing county superintendent based on the candidate being the most qualified candidate for
the position.

11.12.d. Initial Authorization for CTE Health Care Fundamentals. A candidate applying for an
initial Authorization for CTE Health Care Fundamentals permit is required to submit documentation that
they meet the following criteria: holds a Professional Teaching Certificate endorsed for biology,
chemistry, general science or health; completion of the required WVDE-sponsored professional learning
activities; and is recommended for renewal by the employing county superintendent based on a candidate
with the required certification not being available to fill the position.

11.12.d.1. Renewal of CTE Health Care Fundamentals. A candidate applying for a renewal is
required to submit documentation that they meet the following criteria: completion of the required
WVDE-sponsored professional learning activities; and, is recommended by the employing county
superintendent.

11.12.e. Initial Authorization for Coaching. A candidate for an initial Authorization for Coaching
permit is required to submit documentation that they meet the following criteria:

11,12.e.1. The requirements established in section 9.2;

11.12.e.2. Holds a minimum of a high school diploma or has successfully passed a WVBE-
approved high school equivalency exam;

11.12.e.3. Employed under a contract with a county board of education to serve as a coach
or authorized to be a volunteer coach;

11.12.e.4. Completion of approved training if the sport falls within the jurisdiction of the
WVSSAC, or approved county board of education training if the sport is not within the jurisdiction of the
WVSSAC. Provided, the candidate must also submit documentation that they have successfully completed
CPR and Automated External Defibrillator (AED) training provided or authorized by the recommending
county board of education; and,

11.12.e.5. Ils recommended by the county superintendent based on the candidate being the
most qualified candidate for the position. An authorization to coach is effective on the
employment/assignment start date provided on the application or the date that the application was
received by the WVDE, whichever occurs last.

11.12.e.5.A. A county superintendent aware of any act(s) on the part of any individual
serving in a coaching position for which a certificate may be revoked is required to report the information
including all facts and evidence to the State Superintendent for any action the State Superintendent
deems appropriate.

60
