126CSR136

10.2.b.2. Conditions for Issuance. The candidate for licensure is required to submit
documentation that they meet the following criteria:

10.2.b.2.A. State-Approved Program. Successful completion of an IHE’s state-approved
educational leadership program and be recommended by the designated official at the IHE where the
candidate completed the program; or,

10.2.b.2.B. Out-of-State Licensure. For educators who hold a valid out-of-state
Administrative Certificate, the candidate is required to only present official academic transcripts reflecting
that they have earned the required master’s degree from an accredited |HE and a copy of the educator’s
valid out-of-state Administrative Certificate to be issued a certificate, or present a letter of eligibility from
the other state’s licensing agency in lieu of the IHE recommendation provided that the educator has
completed the ELI and three years of valid administrative/management level experience or teaching
experience as defined in section 4 and hold, or be eligible to hold, a West Virginia Professional Teaching
Certificate and provide official academic transcripts verifying that the candidate has earned the required
master’s degree from an accredited IHE. The out-of-state Administrative Certificate is required to be for
the same or equivalent specialization for which a West Virginia endorsement is available; or,

10.2.b.2.C. Out-of-State Graduate Not Licensed. In addition to the general criteria in
section 10.2.a.1, the educator is required to satisfy the minimum proficiency level, as approved by the
WVBE, on the content specialization test in educational leadership unless the candidate meets one of the
exemptions specified in section 10.1.e. Required scores are specified in the directory.

10,2.b.3. Validity Period. The Initial Professional Administrative Certificate is valid for five
school years and expires on June 30 of the last year of its validity.

10.2.b.4. Renewal of Professional Administrative Certificate.
10.2.b.4.A. Renewal of a Professional Administrative Certificate valid for one year

10.2.b.4.A.1. Three semester hours of coursework from an accredited IHE with a
minimum 3.00 GPA in each course related to public education or WVDE WVLearns courses completed
subsequent to the issuance of the certificate being renewed and within the five-year period immediately
preceding the date of application; and,

10.2.b.4.A.2. Recommendation. If the candidate is currently employed by a county
board of education, multi-county CTE center, or WVSDT, the candidate must be recommended for
renewal by the employing county superintendent. If the educator is not employed by a county board of
education, then the educator must secure a recommendation from a personal or professional reference
that is not related to, nor residing in the same household as, the candidate.

10.2.b.4.B. Renewal of a Professional Administrative Certificate valid for five years.
10.2.b.4.B.1. Six semester hours of coursework from an accredited |IHE with a

minimum 3.00 GPA in each course related to public education or WVDE WVLearns courses completed
subsequent to the issuance of the certificate being renewed and within the five-year period immediately

29
