126CSR136

6.3. The provisions of this policy regarding actions against a teaching certificate, reporting
requirements, and the public database apply to all public school teachers or certificate holders whether
employed by a county board of education or a public charter school.

§126-136-7. Responsibilities for Licensure.
7.1. Candidates and licensed individuals shall:

7.1.a. Familiarize themselves with licensure requirements. All educators are responsible for
familiarizing themselves with the West Virginia licensure and salary classification requirements and
making application for any licensure/salary classification to which the educator is entitled. An Educator’s
failure to apply for a certificate or an additional endorsement within 12 months from the completion of
an approved program may result in additional requirements before the educator can be licensed as
indicated in section 10.1.e. It is an educator’s responsibility to ensure that they hold a certificate valid for
their assignment and that the correct endorsement and/or programmatic level are reflected on the
certificate;

7.1.b. Consult with County Superintendent or Professional Designee. Each employed educator
shall select, in consultation with the county superintendent or professional designee when applicable, the
most appropriate coursework to the educator’s current or anticipated assignment and long-range
professional learning plan; and

7.1.c. Complete Renewal Credit/Coursework. The educator is encouraged to complete the
coursework for the renewal of the Professional Certificate one year prior to the expiration date of the
certificate being renewed.

7.2. The county superintendent shall:

7.2.a. Counsel Employees. The county superintendent or professional designee is encouraged
to advise employed educators on current licensure requirements and the educator’s professional
responsibility for maintaining their certificates, additional endorsements, and advanced salary
classifications, including the proper process for maintaining licensure and endorsements. County
superintendents or professional designees are encouraged to notify employees at least one year in
advance of the date the employee’s certificates must be renewed;

7.2.6. Recommend for Licensure. The county superintendent shall recommend, or not
recommend, the issuance and renewal of all certificates for educators employed by the county board of
education (W. Va. Code §18A-3-2a);

7.2.c. Report Immorality and Neglect of Duty. The county superintendent shall report any acts
referenced in W. Va. Code §18A-3-6 for which a certificate may be revoked or for which other action may
be taken, together with all facts and evidence, as may be proper, to the State Superintendent for the State
Superintendent’s judgment;

7.2.d. Employ and Assign Personnel. The county superintendent shall recommend to the county
board of education the most qualified candidate for each instructional, student support service, and
administrative position (W. Va. Code §18A-4-7a). Additionally, the county superintendent shall ensure
that all educators in their school district hold appropriate licensure for their assignment within the first

15
