126CSR136

22.2.g. Effective Date. The effective date of any advanced salary classification is limited to the
date that all requirements were met for the advanced salary as verified on an official college/university
transcript but is prohibited from exceeding three months prior to the date the application was received
by the WVDE in accordance with section 9.10.a.

22.2.h. An individual holding an expired certification is not eligible for an advanced salary
classification or advanced degree level.

22.3. Salary Classification for a CTE Permit or Certificate. The basic salary for a CTE Permit holder
shall be based on a CTE salary of BA, while the salary for a CTE Certificate holder may be a higher CTE
salary level based on degrees earned and/or completed coursework. CTE advanced salary classifications
are recognized only on a CTE Certificate. Advanced salary classifications for a CTE Certificate may not
exceed a classification of MA+45. A CTE advanced salary classification for an educator whose CTE
Certificate is not based on a degree includes CTE BA+15, CTE MA, CTE MA+15, CTE MA+30, and CTE
MA+45.

22.3.a. Additional CTE Salary Classification. A CTE educator who received an advanced salary
classification under previous provisions is eligible for an additional salary classification after completing
15 semester hours of additional college coursework through an accredited IHE for each new salary
classification.

22.3.b. CTE Coursework Update. Completion of six semester hours of college/university
coursework in the teaching specialization update are required for each advanced salary classification for
a CTE educator. A maximum of six semester hours of teaching specialization update coursework is
acceptable for each advanced salary classification.

22.3.c. Permanent CTE Certificate. An educator holding a permanent CTE Certificate may be
eligible for a MA+30 CTE salary classification based on earning a BA from an accredited IHE. An educator
holding a permanent CTE Certificate may be eligible for an MA+45 CTE salary classification based on
earning a BA+15 semester hours of graduate credit from an accredited IHE or based on earning a MA. A
Registered Nurse holding an Adult Permit and teaching an LPN Program may be eligible for an MA+45 CTE
salary classification.

22.3.d. Non-Degree CTE Coursework. An educator not pursuing a degree but requesting a CTE
advanced salary classification must select semester hour coursework from an accredited IHE as approved
by the designated official at the WVDE Office of CTE. Approved semester hour coursework must be
related to public education and may include occupational update credits approved by the WVDE.

22.3.2. Recommendation. A CTE Educator is required to be recommended for an advanced
salary classification by the designated official at the WVDE Office of CTE.

§126-136-23. Fee Reimbursements and Salary Supplements.
23.1. Tuition Reimbursement for Certificate Renewal or Shortage Areas.
23.1.a. W.Va. Code §18A-3-3a, an educator applying for tuition reimbursement is required to

submit documentation that they meet the following criteria: holds either a valid West Virginia
Professional Teaching, Student Support, or Administrative Certificate, or one of these Professional

91
