126CSR136

17.2.b.1. had a foreign credential evaluation by a WVDE-approved foreign credential
evaluation agency verifying that the candidate has completed the equivalent of an approved educational
personnel preparation program in the United States in a specialization offered in West Virginia, with or
without the required tests in pre-professional skills and Content and/or Professional Education; or holds
the necessary credentials in another country to teach in the public schools of that country; has completed
a degree equivalent to the required degree level in the United States; and, has earned an overall GPA
equivalent to a 2.50 in the United States, if applicable.

17.2.c. Renewal of the Permit for Non-United States Citizen. A candidate applying for renewal
of a Permit for Non-United States Citizen is required to submit documentation that they meet the
requirements established in section 10.4.a.1 and the following criteria:

17.2.c.1. A Candidate must hold a valid Permanent Resident Card, Employment Authorization
Document (EAD), or work permit issued by the United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS)
or appropriate visa (W. Va. Code §18A-3-1).

17.2.c.2. After becoming a United States citizen or meeting the conditions established in
section 10, a candidate is eligible to apply for an Initial Professional Teaching Certificate.

17.2.d. Validity. The Permit for Non-United States Citizen is valid for one school year and may
be renewed once.

§126-136-18. Appropriate Assignments According to License.

18.1. Assignment of an Educator. An educator who is employed within the public schools of this
State shall hold a valid certificate for the specialization(s) and grade level(s) to which they are assigned
(W. Va. Code §18A-3-2).

18.2. Assignment One Grade Above or Below. Effective July 1, 1998, professional personnel newly
assigned to a position will not be allowed to teach one grade level above or below the grade level(s)
reflected on their certificate unless the educator was granted a Permanent Authorization under a previous
policy as per Appendix B. The Permanent Authorization shall be valid in any county in West Virginia.

18.3. Adult Programs. An educator working in a program for adults must hold a valid certification
for the area(s) of specialization.

18.4. Home/Hospital Instruction. An educator providing temporary home teaching or visiting
teacher services, whether regular and/or special education, must hold a Professional Teaching Certificate
with an endorsement appropriate to the grade level(s) of instruction. Home/hospital instruction for an
eligible student with an exceptionality requires that the special education teacher who is implementing
the student’s special education services in an out-of-school environment placement must hold a
Professional Teaching Certificate with an endorsement in the student’s primary exceptionality.

18.5. Curriculum Enrichment. An individual may provide, by reason of educational or practical

background and employment records, curriculum enrichment on a part-time or temporary basis in highly
specialized areas. These program areas include, but are not limited to, performing arts, professions, and

82
