126CSR136

12.2.b.1. A candidate for an ECCAT || Permanent Authorization is also required to meet one
of the following: Completion of a program for the ACDS reflected through a seal bearing certificate
issued by the United States Department of Labor or verification of Completion of a program for a CDA
Credential verified by a current seal-bearing certificate issued by a CDA National Credentialing Program
as well as completion of unduplicated WVDE-approved coursework equivalent to a minimum of three
semester hours or WVLearns coursework in each of the two areas of early childhood literacy science of
reading and numeracy; completion of unduplicated WVDE-approved coursework equivalent to a
minimum of three semester hours or WVLearns coursework in each of the four areas of early childhood
special education, child development, early childhood literacy science of reading, numeracy, which
includes classroom management and expectations; and,

12.2.b.2. If a candidate is currently employed by a county board of education, multi-county
CTE center, or WVSDT, the candidate must be recommended for an ECCAT || Permanent Authorization by
the employing county superintendent. If the candidate is not employed by a county board of education,
then they are required to submit a recommendation from a personal or professional reference that is not
related to, nor residing in the same household as, the candidate.

12.2.c. Validity Period. An ECCAT || Permanent Authorization shall remain valid unless it is
surrendered, suspended, or revoked.

12.2.d. Grade Extension for Grades 1 through 3. Candidates who hold an ECCAT I] Permanent
Authorization issued with an effective date prior to July 1, 2023, are eligible to apply for an endorsement
for grades 1-3 by completing the required WVDE-approved coursework.

12.3. ECCAT Ill Permanent Authorization with Permanent Paraprofessional Certificate.

12.3.a. General Criteria. The ECCAT Ill Permanent Authorization may be issued to a candidate
performing duties in a pre-k through third grade classroom if the candidate holds a high school diploma,
WVBE-approved high school equivalent, or a degree, if applicable, through an accredited IHE; a Permanent
Paraprofessional Certificate; and has completed the required WVDE-approved coursework.

12.3.a.1. A person employed as an ECCAT in a pre-k through grade 3 program shall hold the
authorization for either ECCAT |, ECCAT II, or ECCAT III (W. Va. Code §18-5-18).

12.3.b. Conditions for Issuance. A candidate for an ECCAT Ill Permanent Authorization is
required to submit documentation that they meet the following criteria: a rigorous standard of quality
demonstrated through a formal state-approved academic assessment that includes, but is not limited to,
a measurement of the candidate’s subject matter knowledge and ability to assist in instructing reading,
writing, and mathematics as well as reading readiness, writing readiness, and mathematics readiness as
appropriate. A candidate who has passed the current state competency exam for aides, administered by
a county board of education, and developed (W. Va. Code §18A-4-8e), or has a valid or expired
Professional Teaching Certificate or its equivalent is sufficient to meet this requirement; and,

12.3.b.1. Completion of a program for the ACDS reflected through a seal bearing certificate
issued by the United States Department of Labor or verification of Completion of a program for a CDA
Credential verified by a current seal-bearing certificate issued by a CDA National Credentialing Program
as well as completion of unduplicated WVDE-approved coursework equivalent to a minimum of three
semester hours or WVLearns coursework in each of the two areas of early childhood literacy science of

71
