126CSR136

issued to a candidate that meets the following requirements: holds a minimum of a BA through an
accredited IHE reflected on official academic transcripts, or a minimum of a Nursing Diploma/AA reflected
on official academic transcripts and a valid West Virginia RN license; the general requirements in
accordance with section 9; a minimum GPA of 2.00; and the conditions for issuance established in section
11.10.b.2. A long-term substitute is a substitute authorized to fill a position for more than 30 days. A
Non-United States Citizen candidate is required to meet the documentation requirements in accordance
with section 17.1.

11.10.b.2. Conditions for |lssuance. A candidate for a Long-Term Substitute Permit is required
to submit documentation that they meet the following criteria:

11.10.b.2.A. Verification that they have completed 18 clock hours of training provided,
or authorized, by the employing county or available through the WVDE WVLearns platform that included
classroom management, state and local policies, state-approved content standards, an overview of school
law that included reporting requirements for suspected child abuse, and beginning July 1, 2021, trauma-
informed best practices. The 18 clock hours may include a maximum of six clock hours of classroom
observation completed within one year prior to the date the application is received by the LEA.

11.10.b.2.A.1. For elementary education endorsements, training shall include
teaching reading, literacy, and numeracy.

11.10.b.2.A.2. Upon hiring, LEAs shall provide information to long-term substitute
teachers relating to IEP plans and 504 plans, detailing their uses and how IEP and/or 504 plans should be
implemented to better serve students.

11.10.b.2.A.3. For school counseling endorsements, in addition to the minimum
number of required semester hours, a candidate is required to complete the WVDE-approved School
Counseling modules; and,

11.10.b.2.A.4. Completion of clinical practice at a West Virginia IHE approved by the
WVBE to offer teacher education programs may be used to meet training requirements. The clinical
practice must have been completed within one year prior to the date the application is received by the
LEA, or the candidate must hold a valid Permanent West Virginia Professional Teaching Certificate in
another endorsement area. If the candidate does not hold a professional certificate but has been a
teacher of record fora minimum of one year within the past three years, the experience as the teacher of
record may be used to meet training requirements.

11.10.b.2.B. College/University Coursework. Completion of 12 semester hours of
coursework with a minimum GPA of 2.00 for each course from an accredited |HE in any specialization area
recognized on the Professional Teaching or Support Certificate or achieved passing scores on the WVBE-
required content exam for the requested area(s) as specified in the Licensure Testing Directory. For
elementary education endorsements, a minimum of 12 semester hours that included at least one college
level mathematics course and a combination of core content coursework including, but not limited to,
English, Science and Social Studies. One course related to child development, early learning, or reading
and writing may be used in lieu of a core content course other than mathematics; and, the candidate must
be recommended for a Long-Term Substitute Permit by the superintendent of the employing county; or

50
