126CSR136

16.3. Application for West Virginia Certification with a Valid Out-of-State Certificate. A candidate is
required to submit a copy of their valid out-of-state certificate with the appropriate application to ensure
accurate interpretation of the out-of-state certificate. The WVDE may issue to an out-of-state candidate
any endorsement included on their valid out-of-state certificate that is currently offered by the State of
West Virginia. If the valid out-of-state certificate includes any endorsement(s) not currently offered by
this state, the candidate may secure official documentation from the state in which the valid certification
was issued that identifies those endorsement areas, if any, in which the candidate would be certified to
teach in the issuing state. This documentation may be utilized to meet the criteria required for
certification to teach in the endorsement areas for which West Virginia currently requires certification.

16.3.a. Exception. Speech Language Pathologists who are licensed in a state where the agency
or licensing board responsible for issuing certificates for employment in the public schools of that state
no longer requires Speech Language Pathologists licensure may apply for a West Virginia Student Support
Certificate if the candidate submits documentation that they meet the following criteria: holds a
certificate recognized by the issuing state’s licensing board or agency authorizing them to work in a public
school of that state; and, the requirements required in section 10.

16.4. Expiration Dates of Certification Granted to Candidates Based on Valid, Out-of-State
Certification.

16.4.a. A candidate applying for an initial West Virginia Professional Teaching Certificate with a
valid out-of-state teacher certificate after October 1, 2024, may be issued a Non-Transferrable
Professional Teaching Certificate valid for three years. The three-year, Non-Transferrable Professional
Teaching Certificate is renewable if the requirements established in section 10 have been meet. A
candidate who successfully completes a WVBE-approved Teacher Performance Assessment in accordance
with Policy 5100 may convert the certificate to a transferable Professional Teaching Certificate upon
application. A converted teaching certificate expires in the same year as the original non-transferrable
certificate.

16.4.a.1. Exception. A candidate who is licensed in another state may use five years of full-
time teaching experience in one or more area(s) of endorsement on the certificate or who successfully
completed a nationally-normed TPA adopted by the licensing state; or who previously completed five
years of full-time teaching experience with a minimum of one year in a West Virginia public school or
accredited non-public school in accordance with Policy 2330 may be issued a transferable teaching
certificate.

16.4.b. Permanent Professional Teaching Certificate. If a valid out-of-state certificate is listed as
permanent by the issuing state and the candidate submits documentation that they have a minimum of
five years of full-time experience in the endorsements area(s) included on the valid certificate, the
candidate is eligible for a West Virginia Permanent Professional Teaching Certificate upon satisfactory
completion of the licensure application process.

16.4.c. Provisional Administrative Certificate. A candidate applying for an Administrative
Certificate endorsed for school principal, supervisor of instruction, and/or superintendent based on an
accredited educational leadership program, or a valid out-of-state administrative certificate is eligible for
a renewable Provisional Administrative Certificate valid for five years. Upon employment as an
administrator in a West Virginia public school and completion of the ELI required by W. Va. Code §18A-3A-
3, a candidate is eligible for a Professional Administrative Certificate valid for five years. An individual

80
