126CSR136

9.12.b. Exceptions for tests, scores, or industry credentials shall remain valid for 12 months after
completion of an approved program for licensure where the candidate was continuously enrolled even if
the test, score, or industry credential has modified.

§126-136-10. Licenses for Professional Educators.
10.1. Professional Teaching Certificate.
10.1.a. Temporary Renewable Teaching Certificate.

10.1.a.1. General Criteria. A Temporary Renewable Teaching Certificate may be requested if
the candidate possesses an expired out-of-state certificate issued without restrictions equivalent to a
West Virginia Professional Teaching Certificate at the time the application is submitted and meets the
general requirements of section 9 including the criminal history record requirements, completes the
WVDE module on school safety and social/emotional wellbeing if the out-of-state certificate has been
expired more than three years, and has obtained employment, or an offer of employment, in a West
Virginia public school.

10.1.a.2. Validity Period. The Temporary Renewable Teaching Certificate shall be valid for a
period of one year and may be renewed twice.

10.1.a.3. Renewal of Temporary Renewable Teaching Certificate. To renew the Temporary
Renewable Teaching Certificate, the candidate must be employed in a West Virginia public school, receive
successful evaluations for each year taught under the Temporary Certificate within the West Virginia
Educator Evaluation System with an earned performance rating of Emerging or above, and be
recommended for renewal by the employing county superintendent.

10.1.a.4. Conversion of Temporary Renewable Teaching Certificate to an initial Professional
Teaching Certificate. To convert a Temporary Renewable Teaching Certificate to an initial Professional
Teaching Certificate, the applicant must have three years of full-time teaching experience under the
Temporary Renewable Teaching Certificate in one or more area(s) of endorsement on the certificate; be
employed in a West Virginia public school; receive successful evaluations for each year taught under the
Temporary Renewable Teaching Certificate within the West Virginia Educator Evaluation System with an
earned performance rating of Emerging or above; and, be recommended for an initial Professional
Teaching Certificate by the employing county superintendent.

10.1.b. Temporary Teaching Certificate for Program Completers.

10.1.b.1. General Criteria. The Temporary Teaching Certificate for Program Completers may be
issued only once to a candidate who has completed an approved preparation program and attempted the
content Praxis at least twice without meeting the required cut score.

10.1.b.2. Conditions for Issuance. The applicant for the Temporary Teaching Certificate for
Program Completers are required to submit documentation that they meet the following: holds a
minimum of a BA including completion of an approved preparation program with an incorporated clinical
experience, residency, or equivalent with the exception of passing scores for the Praxis content and
professional education assessments; received a minimum of a B average in the content area in which the
applicant will be applying for licensure; received a minimum 3.0 cumulative GPA; and is recommended

20
