126CSR136

10.1.f.1.C. Teaching Experience. Two years of full-time teaching experience, one of which
was completed in a West Virginia public school or in a non-public school that has been accredited through
a WVBE-approved accreditation agency in accordance with Policy 2330, within one, or a combination of,
the endorsement(s) on the initial Professional Teaching Certificate; and

10.1.f.2. Validity Period. The Professional Teaching Certificate valid for five years expires on
June 30 of the last year of its validity.

10.1.f.3. Renewal of Five-Year Teaching Certificate.

10.1.f.3.A. General Criteria. The renewal application is required to be submitted after
January 1 of the year the five-year certificate expires. The candidate for licensure is required to submit
documentation that they meet the following criteria:

10.1.f.3.B. Coursework. To renew a certificate valid for an additional five years:

10.1.f.3.B.1. Six semester hours of coursework from an accredited IHE with a
minimum 3.00 GPA in each course related to public education or WVDE WVLearns courses completed
subsequent to the issuance of the certificate being renewed and within the five-year period immediately
preceding the date of application; or a MA+30 salary classification based on the awarding of a MA; or has
reached the minimum of 60 years old; and,

10.1.f.3.C. Recommendation. If the candidate is currently employed by a county board
of education, multi-county CTE center, or WVSDT, the candidate is required to be recommended for
renewal by the employing county superintendent. If the educator is not employed by a county board of
education, then the educator must secure a recommendation from a personal or professional reference
that is not related to, nor living in the same household as, the candidate.

10.1.g. Permanent Professional Teaching Certificate.

10.1.g.1. Conditions for Issuance. The candidate for licensure is required to submit
documentation that they meet the following criteria:

10.1.g.1.A. Holds or will be eligible to hold a Professional Teaching Certificate valid for
either three years or five years after January 1 of the year the three-year certificate expires; and holds a
Master’s Degree related to public education in accordance with section 9.10; and complete five years of
educational full-time teaching experience, including two years in the specialization(s) and one year
minimum full-time in a West Virginia public school or in an accredited private school in accordance with
Policy 2330, completed the Beginning Educator Internship and six semester hours of coursework from an
accredited IHE with a minimum 3.00 GPA in each course related to public education or WVDE WVLearns
courses completed subsequent to the issuance of the certificate being renewed and within the five-year
period immediately preceding the date of application; or a Master’s +30 salary classification, or is a
minimum of 60 years old; or

10.1.g.1.B. Holds a Professional Teaching Certificate valid for five years each that has

been issued twice after January 1 of the year the five-year certificate expires; and holds a Bachelor’s
Degree related to public education pursuant to section 9.10; and complete five years of educational full-

26
