126CSR136

10.5.c.3. Validity Period. The Professional School Nutrition Director Certificate is issued to
expire on June 30 of the year in which the SNS certificate is set to expire.

10.5.c.4. Renewal. A candidate for licensure is required to submit documentation that they
meet the following criteria: Valid renewed SNS certificate issued by the School Nutrition Association
(SNA); and be recommended for renewal by the employing county superintendent in the county where
the candidate is employed.

10.5.d. School Nurse Certificate

10.5.d.1. General Criteria. A Temporary Nurse Certificate may be issued to a candidate who
holds a valid Registered Nurse (RN) license as set forth in W. Va. Code §30-7-6; the general requirements
specified in section 9; the minimum GPA specified in section 9.11 if applicable; and the conditions for
issuance specified in section 10.5.d.2.

10.5.d.2. Conditions for Issuance. The candidate for the Temporary Nurse Certificate must
submit evidence of the following: is at least 18 years of age; minimum of a high school diploma or
equivalent; holds a valid RN license issued by the West Virginia Board of Registered Professional Nurses
with review and approval of disciplinary action; complete the School Nurse orientation professional
learning activities provided or approved by the WVDE; and receive the recommendation of the county
superintendent verifying that the candidate is the most qualified candidate for the position.

10.5.d.3. Validity Period. The Temporary Nurse Certificate shall be valid for a period of one
year and shall expire on June 30 of the last year of its validity and may not be renewed.

10.5.d.4. Conversion of the Temporary Nurse Certificate to or Issuance of the Nurse
Certificate. The candidate for licensure must provide evidence of satisfying the following: holds a valid
Registered Nurse (RN) license as set forth in W. Va. Code §30-7-6; the general requirements specified in
section 9; the minimum GPA specified in section 9.11 if applicable; and proof of completion or WVDE-
approved college/university coursework or its equivalent from West Virginia WVLearns.

10.5.d.5. Validity Period. The Professional Nurse Certificate shall be valid for a period of
three years and shall expire on June 30 of the last year of its validity.

10.5.e.5. Renewal of Professional Nurse Certificate. Complete a minimum of 12 continuing
education contact hours in school health or pediatric medicine topics provided or approved by the
WVDE; and be recommended for renewal by the employing county superintendent in the county where
the candidate is employed.

§126-136-11. Permits Issued to Professional Educators.
11.1. Restricted Pre-Professional Permit.
11.1.a. General Criteria. The Restricted Pre-Professional Permit may be issued only one time to
a candidate who has been continuously employed for a specific assignment under a First-Class/Full-Time

Permit and has completed all course requirements of the approved program but has not attained the
required passing scores on the WVBE-required content exams.

39
