126CSR136

three months of such employment. If an educator is employed in good faith on the anticipation that the
educator is eligible for a certificate and it is later determined that the educator was not eligible, the county
superintendent shall be authorized to pay the educator for a time not exceeding three school months or
the date of notification of the ineligibility, whichever occurs first. (W. Va. Code §18A-3-2); and

7.2.e. Verify Contracted or Cooperative Services. The county superintendent shall assure that
an educator providing contracted services, or services through a cooperative agreement, holds the same
licensure required for an educator employed by a county board of education.

7.3. The WVDE shall:

7.3.a. Notify the candidate in writing that their application for licensure or salary classification
has been approved or denied;

7.3.b. Provide technical assistance to individuals, county boards of education, and other
agencies in understanding and implementing the licensure process. The WVDE shall serve as the
repository for all licensure records, documents, and related materials. Applications, academic transcripts,
fees, and other documents submitted for the issuance or maintenance of a certificate become the
property of the WVDE upon submission;

7.3.c. Waive Requirements as appropriate. The State Superintendent shall have the authority
to waive licensure requirements in situations where, after thorough investigation, it is determined that
the candidate’s knowledge, preparation, and/or experience are adequate to justify such waiver. If the
waiver request could result in the extension of a certificate or the issuance of a new certificate, the written
request must be accompanied by the appropriate application and processing fee. The State
Superintendent shall provide, in writing, the reason for granting or denying the waiver. A copy of the
State Superintendent’s decision shall be maintained in the candidate’s records. If the WVDE recommends
that an application be denied for cause, the candidate may not request a waiver but may file an appeal
pursuant to the procedures outlined in Policy 1340.

7.3.d. Set Waiver Period. The waiver granted by the State Superintendent shall be for a period
of one year unless the State Superintendent finds that a longer waiver is justified. During this one-year
period, the candidate must complete all requirements that were waived. Prior to the conclusion of the
one-year waiver period, the candidate must apply for licensure and meet all requirements for the
licensure to be issued for the remaining period of the certificate. If the State Superintendent finds that a
longer waiver is justified, the reasons must be stated in writing upon granting the request; and

7.3.e. Receive a Report from County Board of Education. The county board of education shall
provide the WVBE by October 1, annually, data that includes available teacher positions in the county and
any shortages in subject matter areas in the county.

§126-136-8. Teachers and Paraprofessionals in Federally Funded Programs.

8.1. All teachers and paraprofessionals in federally-funded programs must meet applicable West
Virginia state certification and licensure requirements.

§126-136-9. General Requirements and Dates Certain for Licensure.

16
