126CSR136

10.3.a.1.A. School Counselor. A Professional Student Support Certificate may be issued
for School Counselor to a candidate who meets the following criteria: holds an MA in Counseling from an
accredited IHE and has successfully completed an accredited School Counseling Program; or, holds an MA
in Counseling from an accredited IHE and a valid out-of-state certificate endorsed in school counseling.

10.3.a.1.B. School Nurse. A Professional Student Support Certificate is issued for School
Nurse to a candidate who meets the following criteria: holds a BA or MAin nursing from an accredited
IHE, a valid Registered Nurse (RN) license issued by the West Virginia Registered Nurse Board; or, holds a
valid Multi-State Registered Nurse (RN) license from a compact state, and has successfully completed an
accredited School Nursing Program, holds a valid national certificate in school nursing from the National
Board of Certification of School Nurses (NBCSN); or holds a valid national certification in an area
recognized by WVDE for school nurses that includes, but is not limited to, school nurse practitioner,
pediatric nurse practitioner, family nurse practitioner, clinical specialist in community health nursing,
clinical specialist in child and adolescent psychiatric and mental health nursing, or advanced nursing
administration.

10.3.a.1.B.1. Exceptions.

10.3.a.1.B.1.(a). A School Nurse who obtained NBCSN certification prior to a
BA being required may hold an AA to meet the degree requirement in section 9, or a School Nurse who is
employed on a Full-Time/First Class Permit in accordance with section 11, is not required to have a
minimum of a BA for issuance of the original permit. The candidate is required to submit documentation
of a valid RN license issued by the West Virginia Registered Nurse Board. The WVDE shall review the
status of any disciplinary action prior to issuance of the certificate.

10.3.a.1.B.1.(b). A School Nurse who is employed on a Full-Time/First Class
Permit in accordance with section 11.2 after July 1 is only required to have a minimum of three semester
hours of coursework during the first year of the permit’s issuance.

10.3.a.1.C. School Psychologist. A Professional Student Support Certificate may be issued
for School Psychologist to a candidate who meets the following criteria: completion of an approved
School Psychologist MA program from an accredited |HE or an equivalent degree as determined by the
West Virginia Board of Examiners of Psychologists.

10.3.a.1.D. Speech Language Pathologist (SLP). A Professional Student Support Certificate
may be issued for SLP to a candidate who completes an approved SLP MA program from an accredited
IHE.

10.3.a.1.D.1. Exceptions.

10.3.a.1.D.1.(a). SLPs without a certificate issued to practice in a public school
setting is required to provide verification from the IHE where the SLP preparation program was completed
(MA); verification of completion of a practicum/clinical experience in the pre-kindergarten (pre-k)-12
setting; a copy of the valid SLP certificate from the state agency that issued the SLP certificate; hold a
valid West Virginia Board of Examiners for Speech-Pathology and Audiology license; hold a valid national
certification by the American Speech-Language-Hearing Association (ASHA); submit official seal-bearing
transcripts reflecting all degrees earned, submit passing scores on current Praxis exam as specified in the

31
