126CSR136

10.1.d.4. Renewal of Provisional Alternative Certificate. An application for renewal is
required to be submitted after January 1 of the year the certificate expires. The candidate for licensure is
required to submit documentation of current employment in a West Virginia public school, received
satisfactory evaluations (W.Va. Code §18A-2-12); and, be recommended for renewal by the
superintendent of the county where the candidate is employed. Applications received after January 1 will
have a valid effective date through the following school year with an expiration date of June 30.

10.1.d.5. Conversion of a Provisional Alternative Professional Certificate to an Initial
Professional Teaching Certificate. To convert a Provisional Alternative Professional Certificate to an Initial
Professional Teaching Certificate, candidates are required to submit documentation that they meet the
following criteria:

10.1.d.5.A. Beginning Educator Internship/Induction. Successful completion of a
Beginning Educator Internship/Induction (W. Va. Code §18A-3C-3) for classroom teachers or qualifies for
an exemption in accordance with section 9.5;

10.1.d.5.B. Coursework. Six semester hours with a minimum of 3.00 GPA of appropriate
college/university coursework or WVLearns coursework through the WVDE related to public education as
defined in section 9.10 completed subsequent to the issuance of the initial Provisional Alternative
Professional Certificate to be converted within the last five years, or hold an MA+30, or is a minimum of
60 years old; and

10.1.d.5.C. Experience. One year on the Alternative Teaching Certificate and two years
of full-time teaching experience under the Provisional Alternative Professional Certificate in one or more
area(s) of endorsement on the certificate in West Virginia; and

10.1.d.5.D. Successful Evaluations. Successful evaluations for each year taught under the
Provisional Alternative Professional Certificate in the West Virginia Educator Evaluation System, with an
earned performance rating of Emerging or above; and be recommended by the employing county
superintendent, multi-county CTE administrator, or West Virginia Schools of Diversion and Transition
(WVSDT) Superintendent or designee for conversion.

10.1.d.5.£. After January 1 of the year the certificate expires, the candidate may be
eligible for a Five-Year Professional Teaching Certificate if they have met the WVBE-approved Teacher
Performance Assessment pursuant to Policy 5100.

10.1.e. Initial Professional Teaching Certificate.

10.1.e.1. General Criteria. An initial Professional Teaching Certificate may be issued to a
candidate who has the minimum of a BA or an MA, as specified in Appendix A, through an accredited |HE;
the general requirements specified in section 9; the minimum GPA specified in section 9.11 and has
completed the requirements in accordance with section 10.1.c, or holds a valid out-of-state certificate
and has completed a minimum of five years of successful teaching experience in a public school within
the last seven years in the area(s) licensure is being sought in the state where the certificate was issued.
An Initial Professional Teaching Certificate may be issued in the teaching specializations set forth in
Appendix A. The Initial Professional Teaching Certificate shall be endorsed to indicate the specialization(s)
and grade levels in which the certificate holder can be assigned to in the public schools.

23
