126CSR136

11.6. First-Class/Full-Time Permit for Administrators.

11.6.a. General Criteria. Initial First-Class/Full-Time Permit endorsed for Principal, General
Supervisor, or Superintendent may be issued to a candidate employed for an administrative assignment
who meets the following criteria: completed a minimum of an MA through an accredited IHE; the general
requirements specified in section 9; the minimum GPA requirement in accordance with section 9.11; has
three years of eligible experience in accordance with section 4; possesses the education and training
evaluation skills through the WVDE, or an equivalent training approved by the WVBE; and the
requirements for issuance in accordance with section 11.6.

11.6.b. Conditions for Issuance. A candidate for the First-Class/Full-Time Permit for
Administrators is required to submit documentation that they meet the following criteria: verification
from the designated official at the IHE through which the candidate is enrolled that the candidate has
completed a minimum of 25 percent of the approved program in the specialization(s) in which the permit
is requested; the Professional Commitment form verifying the candidate’s enrollment in a state-approved
program; and, be commended for a First Class/Full-Time Permit for Administrators by the county
superintendent based on the candidate being the most qualified candidate for the position, or if the
candidate for the permit is a county superintendent, be recommended for a First-Class/Full-Time Permit
for Administrators by, and submit employment verification, from the county board of education.

11.6.c. Validity Period. The First-Class/Full-Time Permit for Administrators is valid for one school
year and expires on June 30 of that school year. An educator employed on, or after, January 1 may be
issued a First-Class/Full-Time Permit for Administrators valid until June 30 of the following school year.

11.6.d. Renewal of the First-Class/Full-Time Permit for administrators who continue to be
employed in the specialization(s) reflected on the permit is required to submit documentation that they
meet the following criteria: verification from the designated official at the IHE through which candidate
is enrolled that the candidate has completed six semester hours of college/university credit reflecting a
3.00 GPA within the IHE’s state-approved program in the specialization(s) in which the permit is
requested; and, be recommended for renewal by the employing county superintendent or if the candidate
for the permit is a county superintendent, be recommended for renewal by, and submit employment
verification and satisfactory performance documentation from, the county board of education (W. Va.
Code §18-4-2).

11.6.e. Time Limitations. All requirements for a Professional Administrative Certificate endorsed
for Principal or Supervisor of Instruction shall be completed within five years of the original issuance of
the First-Class/Full-Time Permit for Administrators (W. Va. Code §18A-4-7a). All requirements for the
Professional Administrative Certificate endorsed for Superintendent shall be completed within three years
of the original issuance of the First-Class/Full-Time Permit for Administrators (W. Va. Code §18-4-2). The
position held by an educator issued a Full-Time Permit is not subject to posting if the educator meets the
annual renewal requirements in accordance with section 11.6 and completes a state-approved program.

11.6.f. Extension of the First-Class/Full-Time Permit for Administrators for Extenuating
Circumstances. The First-Class/Full-Time Permit endorsed for Principal, Supervisor of Instruction, or
Superintendent may be extended in accordance with section 14.5 provided the extension does not exceed
the time allowances specified in section 11.3.d.1.B.

45
