126CSR136

Authorization will not be employed to replace a fully state-certified educator; and, be recommended for
an initial authorization for Curriculum/Cultural Enrichment by the employing county superintendent.

11.12.p.1. Renewal of the Authorization for Curriculum/Cultural Enrichment. A
candidate for renewal of an Authorization for Curriculum/Cultural Enrichment is required to submit
documentation that they meet the following criteria: be employed by a county board of education in
West Virginia to provide curriculum/cultural enrichment in accordance with locally adopted policy that
includes a provision that a person performing duties under an Curriculum/Cultural Enrichment
Authorization will not be employed to replace a fully state-certified educator; and, be recommended for
renewal by of the employing county superintendent.

11.12.q. Initial Authorization for School Nurse. Please refer to section 10.5 for a Temporary or
Nurse Certificate.

11.12.r.. Permanent Authorization for Community Programs. A candidate for a Permanent
Authorization for Community Programs is required to provide documentation that they meet the
following criteria: holds a BA in child development, early childhood, or occupational development with an
emphasis in child development/early childhood; completion of coursework and/or professional learning
approved by the WVDE, in the areas of preschool special education, child development, preschool
curriculum, early language and literacy, assessment of young children, and family and community
involvement; completion of at least one year of early education teaching experience; and be
recommended for a Permanent Authorization for Community Programs by either the employing county
superintendent or the director of the employing collaborative community program under contract with
the county board of education.

11.12.s. Initial Temporary Authorization for Community Programs. A candidate for an initial
Temporary Authorization for Community Programs is required to submit documentation that they meet
the following criteria: holds a BA in child development, early childhood, or occupational development
with an emphasis in child development/early childhood; completion of at least one year of early
education teaching experience; submission of commitment to complete coursework and/or professional
learning, approved by the WVDE, in the areas of preschool special education, child development,
preschool curriculum, early language and literacy, assessment of young children, and family and
community involvement; and, be recommended for an initial Temporary Authorization for Community
Programs either by the employing county superintendent or the director of the employing collaborative
community program under contract with the county board of education.

11.12.5.1. Renewal of the Temporary Authorization for Community Programs. A candidate
for renewal is required to provide documentation that they meet the following criteria: completion of six
semester hours of unduplicated coursework or equivalent professional learning approved by the WVDE,
in the areas of preschool special education, child development, preschool curriculum, early language and
literacy, assessment of young children, and family and community involvement or coursework leading to
teacher licensure in Early Education, Preschool Education, or Preschool Special Needs or is beginning in a
new position in a community programs preschool that requires licensure; and, be recommended for
renewal of either by the employing county superintendent or the director of the employing collaborative
community program under contract with the county board of education.

11.12.t. Initial Temporary Authorization for Technology Systems Specialist (TSS). A TSS is an
individual assigned to support and maintain local area networks, servers, computer workstations, or other

63
