126CSR136

11.13.hh.1. General Criteria. The Autism Mentor Permanent Authorization may be issued to
a candidate who meets the qualifications of “Aide III” as defined in W. Va. Code §18A-4-8 and is filling a
posted as an Autism Mentor by the county school system.

11.13.hh.2. Conditions for Issuance. The candidate for the authorization must meet the
qualifications of “Aide III” as defined in W. Va. Code §18A-4-8 and submit documentation that they meet
the following criteria: successful completion of staff development program related to providing
instructional supports to students with autism as determined by the WVDE and in accordance with Policy
5314, and delineated in WVDE’s Autism Spectrum Disorders: Services in West Virginia Schools; have two
years of successful experience providing classroom instructional supports to students with autism; and,
meet the criminal history record check requirements.

11.13.hh.2.a. If the candidate is currently employed by a county board of education,
multi-county CTE center, or WVSDT, the candidate must receive the recommendation of the employing
county superintendent.

11.13.hh.2.b. The Permanent Authorization for Autism Mentor is not eligible for an
advanced salary classification or degree recognition.

11.13.hh.3. Validity Period. The Autism Mentor Permanent Authorization shall continue to
be valid unless surrendered, suspended, or revoked.

§126-136-12. Early Childhood Classroom Assistant Teacher (ECCAT) Authorization, Paraprofessional
Certification, and Aide V/VI Assistant Teacher.

12.1. ECCAT I.

12.1.a. General Criteria. An ECCAT | Temporary Authorization may be issued to a candidate
performing duties in a pre-k through grade 3 classroom if the candidate is employed as an ECCAT when
they apply for authorization and they hold a high school diploma, WVBE-approved high school equivalent,
or a degree, if applicable, through an accredited |HE.

12.1.a.1. A person employed as an ECCAT in a pre-k through grade 3 program shall hold the
position of either ECCAT |, ECCAT II, or ECCAT III (W. Va. Code §18-5-18).

12.1.b. Conditions for Issuance. A candidate for an ECCAT Authorization is required to submit
documentation that they meet the following criteria: holds a minimum of a high school diploma, a WVBE-
approved high school equivalent, or a degree, if applicable, through an accredited IHE; a commitment
verifying the candidate’s agreement to complete coursework, approved by the WVDE in the areas of early
childhood education special education, child development, and early childhood literacy, numeracy, which
includes classroom and behavior management and expectations; and, meets the criminal history record
check requirements;

12.1.b.1. Academic Assessment. A candidate hired by a county board of education shall have
met a rigorous standard of quality and demonstrate, through a formal state-approved academic
assessment, the ability to assist in instructing, reading readiness, writing readiness, and mathematics
readiness, as appropriate. A candidate who has passed the current state competency exam for aides,
administered by a county board of education, and developed (W. Va. Code §18A-4-8e); or, holds a valid

69
