126CSR136

Professional Certificate and is employed as a paraprofessional is not required to hold a Paraprofessional
Certificate.

5.10. Provisional Alternative Certificate. The Provisional Alternative Certificate is a professional
certificate that may be issued to a candidate who meets the experience requirements and/or academic
and professional standards in accordance with section 15. This certificate, issued for one year, may be
renewed twice but is not eligible for additional endorsements based on passing content proficiency exams
pursuant to section 21.2.

5.11. Advanced Credential. Advanced Credentials are awarded to educators for completing
professional learning, coursework, and/or testing that exceeds the requirements for a professional
certificate, which may include a CTE certificate when applicable. Endorsements identified as Advanced
Credentials have unique and specific requirements for the initial issuance and subsequent
renewal. Advanced Credentials may be required for employment.

§126-136-6. Legal Basis for Licensure.

6.1. West Virginia Board of Education (WVBE). The education of professional educators in the state
shall be under the general direction and control of the WVBE. (W. Va. Code §18A-3-1.) The WVBE, in
consultation with the West Virginia Commission for Professional Teaching Standards (WVCPTS), shall
adopt standards for the education of professional educators in the state and for the awarding of
certificates valid in the public schools of this state.

6.2. State Superintendent of Schools (State Superintendent). In accordance with WVBE policies for
the education of professional educators, the State Superintendent may issue certificates valid in this state.
(W. Va. Code §18A-3-1i through §18A-3-2a.)

6.2.a. A county shall employ a candidate for a certificate in good faith on the anticipation that
the candidate is eligible for a certificate. If it is later determined that the candidate was not eligible, the
State Superintendent may authorize payment by the county board of education to the teacher for time
not exceeding three school months or the date of notification of the candidate’s ineligibility, whichever
occurs first, as set forth in W. Va. Code §18A-3-2.

6.2.b. Revocation and Suspension of Certificates. The State Superintendent may, after 10 days’
notice and upon proper evidence, revoke or suspend the certificates of any teacher or certificate holder,
including those certificates that have expired, for any of the following causes: intemperance;
untruthfulness; cruelty; immorality; the conviction of a felony or a guilty plea or a plea of no contest toa
felony charge; the conviction, guilty plea or plea of no contest to any charge involving sexual misconduct
with a minor or a student; or for using fraudulent, unapproved, or insufficient credit to obtain the
certificates. For purposes of section 6 of this policy, teacher is defined as set forth in W. Va. Code §18-1-
1(g) and shall include any individual holding a certificate granted (W. Va. Code §18A-3-2a).

6.2.b.1. In order for any conduct of a teacher or certificate holder involving intemperance;
cruelty; immorality; or using fraudulent, unapproved or insufficient credit to obtain the certificates to
constitute grounds for the revocation of the certificates of the teacher or certificate holder, there must
be a rational nexus between the conduct of the teacher or certificate holder and the performance the
teacher’s/certificate holder’s job.

11
