126CSR136

10.1.e.2. Conditions for Issuance. The candidate for an initial Professional Teaching Certificate
is required to submit documentation that they meet the criteria in accordance with section 10.1.c or meet
the guidelines for out-of-state candidates in section 16; or meet the requirements for conversion of a
West Virginia Alternative Provisional Certificate or Teaching Certificate to an initial Professional Teaching
Certificate in section 10.1; or, hold a valid certificate from the NBPTS in a specialization comparable to
the specializations set forth in Appendix A; and;

10,1.e.2.A. WVBE-Adopted Tests. Unless exempt in accordance with the directory or the
West Virginia CTE Endorsement and Testing Manual approved by the WVBE, an educator must satisfy the
minimum proficiency levels or any identified alternative as indicated in the directory or the West Virginia
CTE Endorsement and Testing Manual as approved by the WVBE for the required Pre-Professional Skills
Tests in reading, writing, and mathematics; and Content Specialization Test(s) for each specialization
licensure is requested, if a test is required. All West Virginia Educator Preparation Programs (EPP) or
WVBE-approved program completers is required to have completed a WVBE-approved Teacher
Performance Assessment pursuant to Policy 5100 or meet the teacher performance assessment
requirements set forth in the Directory or the West Virginia CTE Endorsement and Testing Manual.

10.1.e.2.A.1. Exemptions. A list of exemptions is included in the directory or in the West
Virginia CTE Endorsement and Testing Manual.

10.1.e.2.B. Validity of Test Scores. The validity period for in state and out-of-state tests
and passing scores is 10 years from the date the candidate passed the examination if the tests were the
same required in WVBE policy, or out-of-state policy if applicable, effective at the time the tests were
taken. In circumstances where the WVBE has not modified either the required test or the passing score,
the test and score is valid beyond the ten-year period for initial licensure only. A candidate whose test
scores exceed the ten-year validity period at the time the application for licensure was submitted, or if
the test or test scores were modified after the candidate last tested, is required to satisfy current tests
and passing score requirements.

10.1.e.2.B.1. Exemption. All passing scores from previously WVBE-required pre-
professional skills exams may be used beyond the ten-year limit to satisfy the pre-professional skills
requirement.

10.1.e.2.C. Failure to Apply for Licensure. A candidate who fails to apply for licensure
within 12 months from completing an approved program for licensure is required to satisfy any current
and additional test requirement(s) and program components in effect at the time the application for
licensure is submitted and to comply with the conditions established for the validity period.

10.1.e.3. Validity Period. The initial Professional Teaching Certificate shall be valid for three
school years and expires on June 30 of the last year of its validity.

10.1.e.4. Tests Required for New Specializations on a Professional Certificate. Candidates who
qualify for a new specialization on their Professional Teaching Certificate are required to satisfy all
required content test requirements, if appliable. Candidates who hold a valid professional certificate are

exempt from pre-professional and professional tests.

10.1.e.5. Renewal of a Professional Teaching Certificate issued for one year

24
