126CSR136

10.3.c.2.A. Exception. Student Support and Administrative credentials are exempt from
the TPA Requirement and any educator with a West Virginia professional teaching certificate initially
issued prior to November 15, 2021; and,

10.3.c.3. Recommendation. If the candidate is currently employed by a county board of
education, multi-county CTE center, or WVSDT, the candidate shall be recommended by the
superintendent or official designee. If the educator is not employed by a county board of education, then
the educator is required to secure a recommendation from a personal or professional reference that is
not related to, nor residing in the same household as, the candidate.

10.4. Career and Technical Education (CTE) Certificate.
10.4.a. Temporary CTE Certificate.

10.4.a.1. General Criteria. A non-renewable Temporary CTE Certificate may be issued to an
educator who holds a valid out-of-state CTE Certificate; has been offered employment; and, is applying
for West Virginia licensure, provided the educator meets the general criteria for the Initial CTE Certificate
in accordance with section 10.4.b, except for holding the required 5 years of teaching experience and/or
the required industry recognized credentials and/or passing scores on tests as identified in the West
Virginia CTE Endorsement and Testing Manual. A non-renewable Temporary CTE Certificate may be issued
to an educator who holds a valid West Virginia Professional Teaching Certificate and has been offered
employment; provided, the educator meets the general criteria for the Initial CTE Certificate in accordance
with section 9, except for obtaining the specified credential identified in the West Virginia CTE
Endorsement and Testing Manual. To convert this certificate to the CTE Certificate, the educator must
acquire the required industry recognized credentials; pass all required tests; complete applicable WVDE
approved coursework, and, apply for initial licensure.

10.4.a.2. Validity Period. The Temporary CTE Certificate is valid for one year and expires on
June 30 of the year of its validity.

10.4.b. Initial CTE Certificate.

10.4.b.1. General Criteria. An Initial CTE Certificate may be issued to a candidate who holds
a high school diploma, state-approved high school equivalency, or a degree, as prescribed by the West
Virginia CTE Endorsement and Testing Manual, through an accredited IHE; and meets the following
criteria: the general requirements specified in section 10.4; acquired the work and training experience
specified in the West Virginia CTE Endorsement and Testing Manual; passed the tests in accordance with
the West Virginia CTE Endorsement and Testing Manual; and the appropriate eligible requirements
identified in section 9. The CTE Certificate is required to include the specialization(s) and grade level(s)
the certificate holder is authorized to be assigned to within the public schools.

10.4.b.2. Conditions for Issuance. A candidate for licensure is required to submit
documentation that they meet the following criteria: successful completion of a state-approved CTE
preparation program and is recommended for a CTE Certificate by a designated official from the program
the candidate completed; or, holds a valid West Virginia Professional Teaching Certificate with verification
of the required years of work experience by the current or former employer(s) as defined in the West
Virginia CTE Endorsement and Testing Manual; or holds a valid out-of-state CTE Certificate in the

35
