126CSR136

4.53. Master’s Degree plus 45 (MA+45). A master’s degree related to public education earned
through an accredited IHE plus an additional 45 semester hours of approved graduate coursework from
an accredited IHE. This classification requires a total of 75 semester hours including a master’s degree
and shall be recognized only on the Professional Certificate or its equivalent.

4.54. Mentor. An experienced classroom teacher assigned to assist and support a beginning
educator through an internship/induction period during the first year of full-time employment in a county
school system or accredited non-public school which is encompassed in the comprehensive system of
support for beginning educators (W. Va. Code §18A-3C-3).

4.55. Non-Public School. A private school, parochial school, church school, school operated by a
religious order, learning pod, microschool, or other school that is not supported with public funds.

4.56. One Year of Experience. One year of full-time experience for conversion/permanent licensure
purposes equals 133 paid days within one school year in an assignment for which the person holds a valid
certificate.

4.57. Paraprofessional. Personnel certified (W. Va. Code §18A-3-2a) employed to perform duties in
a support capacity including, but not limited to, facilitating in the instruction and direct and indirect
supervision of students under the direction of a principal, a teacher, or another designated professional
educator.

4.58. Performance-Based Assessment. As defined in Policy 5100.

4.59. Prerequisite Experience for Conversion. An educator’s paid professional assignment consistent
with the endorsement(s) identified on the educator’s Professional Certificate or permissible under WVBE
policy.

4.60. Professional Certificate or Equivalent. A Professional Teaching Certificate, Professional Student
Support Certificate, Professional Administrative Certificate, CTE Certificate, Provisional Alternative
Certificate, Provisional Professional Student Support Certificate, Provisional Professional Administrative
Certificate, Temporary CTE Certificate, Permit for Non-United-States Citizen, Permanent Authorization for
School Nurse, Temporary Nurse Certificate, or Nurse Certificate, and/or the Alternative Teaching
Certificate required for employment in West Virginia public schools.

4.61. Professional Commitment. A written agreement executed by an educator to pursue
certification in the endorsement area(s) in which the candidate is employed.

4.62. Quarter Hour Conversion. The equivalent to two-thirds of one semester hour.

4.63. Related to Public Education. For purposes of licensure renewal and advanced salary
classification, means: any course offering included in a degree program in the field of K-12 or CTE
education; content and/or professional education coursework related to the current licensure
requirements; content and/or professional education coursework required for an additional
endorsement; professional learning and/or special topics coursework approved by the WVDE; coursework
identified in the personnel evaluation process; coursework related to technology for education; and/or
coursework related to the mission and goals of the WVBE and/or the school organization.
