126CSR136

10.1.c.2.A.2. Content Specialization Test(s) for each specialization for which the candidate
is seeking licensure, if a test is required; and;

10.1.c.2.A.3. The Professional Education Test that includes most of the grade levels the
applicant is seeking licensure for; the approved nationally normed teacher performance assessment
(TPA); a WVBE-approved TPA authorized in Policy 5100 and the directory or meet the conditions under
section 10.1.c.

10.1.c.3. Validity Period. The Professional Teaching Certificate shall be valid for three years
and expires on June 30 of the last year of its validity and may be renewed.

10.1.c.3.A. The Professional Teaching Certificate shall not be transferable unless the
requirements in accordance with section 10.1.c.4 are met.

10.1.c.4.. Conversion of a Non-Transferrable Professional Teaching Certificate to an initial
Professional Teaching Certificate. A candidate who successfully completes a WVBE-approved Teacher
Performance Assessment in accordance with Policy 5100 may convert the certificate to a transferable
Professional Teaching Certificate upon application or complete five years of full-time teaching experience
with a minimum of one year in a West Virginia public school or accredited non-public school pursuant to
Policy 2330, receive successful evaluations for each year taught under the Provisional Alternative
Professional Certificate in the West Virginia Educator Evaluation System, and an earned performance
rating of Emerging or above. The validity period of the converted teaching certificate shall expire on the
same year as the non-transferrable certificate.

10.1.d. Provisional Alternative Certificate.

10.1.d.1. General Criteria. A Provisional Alternative Certificate may be issued to a candidate
who has completed and met all the requirements for a West Virginia County Alternative Certification
Program for the Education of Teachers pursuant to Policy 5901; has received an offer of employment from
a county board of education and held an Alternative Teaching Certificate for a minimum of one school
year. Provisional Alternative Certificates are required to reflect the specialization(s) and grade level(s),
identified in Appendix A, the certificate holder is authorized to be assigned in the public schools. Reflected
endorsements on a certificate are limited to eligible endorsements earned through a WVBE-approved
alternative program. The Provisional Alternative Certificate is prohibited from being transferred.

10.1.d.2. Conditions for Issuance. The candidate for the Provisional Alternative Certificate is
required to submit documentation that they meet the criteria in accordance with section 9; the WVBE
testing requirements in accordance with section 10.1.e; and, be recommended for a Provisional
Alternative Certificate by the employing county superintendent.

10.1.d.3. Validity Period. The Provisional Alternative Certificate shall be valid for one school
year, expires on June 30 of the school year in which it is issued, and may be renewed twice. An educator
who completed the West Virginia Alternative Certification Program for the Education of Teachers in
December, or whose Provisional Certificate is effective on or after January 1, may be issued a Provisional
Alternative Certificate valid until June 30 of the following school year.

22
