126CSR136

or a valid West Virginia CTE Certificate; a valid or expired Advanced Credential for Personal Finance
Education Specialist that was renewed at least once during the appropriate renewal period; completed
additional professional learning related to personal finance education knowledge, skills, and pedagogy
and offered and/or approved by the WVDE; and, completed a minimum of three semester hours of
coursework from an accredited IHE or its equivalent from West Virginia WVLearns directly related to the
field of Personal Finance Education.

24.5. CTE. Permanent Advanced Credentials for areas of CTE may be issued upon completion of
Professional Learning/Coursework specified in the CTE Endorsements and Testing Manual. A candidate
for a Permanent Advanced Credential for a CTE area is required to submit documentation that they meet
the following criteria: the requirements specified in the CTE Endorsements and Testing Manual;
completed the professional learning/coursework as identified in the CTE Endorsements and Testing
Manual; and, be recommended for the Permanent Advanced Credential by the employing county
superintendent, Multi-County CTE Administrator, or WVSDT Superintendent or designee.

24.5.a. Advanced Credential for Initial Option Pathway. An Option Pathway Teacher delivers
instruction to students enrolled in the Option Pathway Program to prepare them for the high school
equivalency assessment. An Option Pathway Advanced Credential is issued for a period equal to the
validity period of the candidate’s current Professional Teaching Certificate, not to exceed five years and
expires on June 30 of the year it is set to expire. A candidate for an Advanced Credential for Initial Option
Pathway is required to submit documentation that they meet the following criteria: holds a valid
Professional Teaching Certificate in any endorsement, grades K-12; their commitment agreement to
complete the required Option Pathway orientation professional learning approved by the WVDE Option
Pathway Coordinator; and, be recommended for an Advanced Credential for Initial Option Pathway by
the employing county superintendent.

24.5.a.1. Renewal of the Advanced Credential for Option Pathway. The Advanced Credential
endorsed for Option Pathway may be renewed if the candidate submits documentation that they meet
the following criteria: holds a valid Professional Teaching Certificate in any endorsement, grades K-12;
and completed unduplicated professional learning offered and/or approved by the WVDE Option Pathway
Coordinator equal to six hours annually.

24.5.a.2. All new Option Pathway Teachers are required during their first year as an Option
Pathway teacher to complete the Option Pathway New Teacher Orientation which may be included to
meet the first-year professional learning clock hour requirement. The Advanced Credential for Option
Pathway may be renewed if the candidate submits documentation that they meet the following criteria:
completed a minimum of 18 clock hours (for a three-year certificate) or 30 clock hours (for a five
year/permanent certificate); and, is recommended for renewal of the Advanced Credential for Option
Pathway by the employing county superintendent.

§126-136-25. Severability.

25.1. If any provision of this policy or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held
invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this policy.

97
