126CSR136

18.20. Assignment of Athletic Trainer. An individual assigned in the role of an athletic trainer must
hold a valid Athletic Training Authorization, be certified in athletic training through the Board of
Certification, Inc, and registered with the West Virginia Board of Physical Therapy. An individual serving
in the role of an athletic trainer is prohibited from being assigned simultaneous coaching responsibilities
in the same sport. It is the responsibility of the individual holding the Athletic Training Authorization to
determine whether or not an injured student athlete participates in a game or practice. A county board
of education is prohibited from employing a candidate in good faith on the anticipation that they are
eligible for a certificate.

18.21. Assignment of Authorized Limited Sports Trainer. An individual assigned in the role of a
Limited Sports Trainer must hold a valid Limited Sports Training Authorization. An individual serving in
the role of Limited Sports Trainer is prohibited from being assigned simultaneous coaching responsibilities
in the same sport. It is the responsibility of the individual serving in the role of a Limited Sports Trainer to
determine whether or not an injured student athlete participates in a game or practice. A county board
of education is prohibited from employing a candidate in good faith on the anticipation that they are
eligible for a certificate.

18.22. Assignment of a Temporary Coach or a Temporary Trainer. In the event the assigned Athletic
Coach or Athletic Trainer or Limited Sports Trainer cannot be present, the county may assign once during
the coaching/Training assignment season for that sport/activity, an individual with a medical background
that includes, but is not limited to, a chiropractor, physical therapist, RN, licensed practical nurse,
physician’s assistant, paramedic, occupational therapist, emergency medical technician, or nurse
practitioner to fulfil the duties of the Coach or Training role for not more than three consecutive days. A
county board of education is prohibited from employing a candidate in good faith on the anticipation that
they are eligible for a certificate.

18.23. Assignment of CTE Director. Beginning with assignments made for the 2022-2023 school
year, an individual assigned as a CTE Director must hold the authorization endorsed for a CTE
Administrator.

§126-136-19. Special Education.

19.1. The Gifted Education specialization shall be issued to a candidate holding a Professional
Teaching Certificate. The endorsement shall be issued for grades 1-12 grade levels. A candidate
previously issued a Gifted Education endorsement for only those grade levels that appeared on their
General Education or CTE Certificate may apply for a 1-12 grade level endorsement.

19.2. Consultative Special Education Teacher. A special education teacher may serve in a
consultative role to content-certified and general education teachers providing direct initial instruction to
special education students. A Consultative Special Education Teacher must meet state certification
requirements with the appropriate endorsement in special education in the served student’s primary
exceptionality.

19.2.a. Duties of Consultative Special Education Teacher. The duties of a Consultative Special
Education Teacher include, but are not limited to, reviewing and re-teaching prerequisite skills; organizing
previously introduced material; reinforcing previously introduced material; adapting curricula for easier
access; assisting with long-term assignments; targeting learning strategies to ensure content knowledge

85
