126CSR136

21.5. Additional CTE endorsements shall be issued in accordance with the West Virginia CTE
Endorsement and Testing Manual and section 10.5.

21.6. An Additional Endorsement in ASL may be issued to a candidate holding a Professional
Teaching Certificate if the candidate submits documentation that they had a qualifying score on the
WVBE-required exam in accordance with the Licensure Testing Directory.

21.7. An Additional Endorsement in Chinese. An educator holding a West Virginia Professional
Certificate endorsed in a programmatic level and area specified in Appendix A may apply for an additional
endorsement in Chinese if the candidate submits documentation that they have completed an approved
program in accordance with section 21.1, or a proficiency-based Chinese language learning and certificate
program for teachers; and, had a minimum score of Level V on the Hanyu Shuiping Kaoshi proficiency test.

21.8. An Additional Endorsement to a valid West Virginia Professional Administrative Certificate
may be issued to a candidate holding a valid West Virginia Professional Administrative Certificate if the
candidate submits documentation that they meet the following criteria: completion of an approved
program for either Principal, Superintendent, or Supervisor of General Instruction; achieved passing
scores for the current WVBE-required exam in accordance with WVBE policy; and, is recommended for
the additional endorsement by the institution where the program was completed. A candidate who
passed a previously required WVBE exam for Administration may use a minimum of five years of
administrative experience in an endorsement area on their Professional Administrative Certificate to
satisfy the examination requirement.

21.9. An Additional Endorsement for Superintendent may be issued to a candidate holding a valid
West Virginia Professional Administrative Certificate if the candidate submits documentation that they
meet the following criteria: has either completed an approved program for a Superintendent
endorsement with the recommendation of the institution, or completed the WVDE New and Aspiring
Superintendent Leadership Training; and, verification of a minimum of 10 years of administrative
experience at the county or school level. A candidate for an additional endorsement for Superintendent
is required to have passing scores on the current WVBE-required exams required for the Administrative
Certificate or passing scores on file from when their Administrative Certificate was first issued. Any work
experience shall include full-time assignment(s) in a public school system or managing a program related
to the public school system where the candidate was a school, district, or state-level administrator where
duties required supervision and evaluation of employees.

§126-136-22. Salary Classifications for Educators.

22.1. State Minimum Salary (W. Va. Code §18A-4-2). The intent of advanced salary classifications is
to recognize educators for completing college/university coursework which will contribute to the
improvement of instruction or other services in the public schools.

22.2. Advanced Salary Classification for Teaching, Student Support, or Administrative Certificates or
equivalent. The advanced salary classifications recognized by the WVDE are BA+15, MA, MA+15, MA+30,
MA+45 and doctorate. These classifications are defined in section 4.

22.2.a. Coursework. The college/university coursework utilized for advanced salary purposes

must be completed at an accredited IHE except coursework completed for a CTE advanced salary
classification recognized on a CTE Certificate must have been completed at an accredited IHE. Equivalent

89
