126CSR136

for a Temporary Teaching Certificate for Program Completers by the county superintendent based on the
applicant being the most qualified candidate for the position. Candidates who completed the program
prior to January 1, 2020, are required to complete the WVDE module on school safety and
social/emotional wellbeing.

10.1.b.3. Validity Period. The Temporary Teaching Certificate for Program Completers shall be
valid for a period of one year and may be renewed twice.

10.1.b.4. Renewal of Temporary Teaching Certificate for Program Completers. To renew the
Temporary Teaching Certificate for Program Completers, the candidate must be employed in a West
Virginia public school; receive successful evaluations for each year taught under the Temporary Certificate
in the West Virginia Educator Evaluation System with an earned performance rating of Emerging or above;
and, be recommended for renewal by the employing county superintendent.

10.1.b.5. Conversion of Temporary Teaching Certificate for Program Completers to an Initial
Professional Teaching Certificate. In order to be issued an Initial Professional Teaching Certificate, a
candidate is required to complete three years of full-time teaching experience under the Temporary
Teaching Certificate for Program Completers; receive successful evaluations for each year taught under
the Temporary Certificate for Program Completers certification in the West Virginia Educator Evaluation
System with an earned performance rating of Emerging or above; completed six semester hours of
coursework or an MA+30, or be at least 60 years old, meet the required cut scores on all WVBE-required
testing in accordance with section 10.1.c; or, meet a qualifying exemption in accordance with section
10.1.e or the WVBE-required score on the edTPA teacher performance assessment set forth in the
Licensure Testing Directory.

10.1.b.5.A. Exception. Candidates who successfully complete both the WVBE-required
testing and the WVBE-required score on the edTPA may apply to convert their certificate to a three-year
Professional Teaching Certificate at any time after meeting this requirement has been met.

10.1.c. Professional Teaching Certificate.

10.1.c.1. General Criteria. A Professional Teaching Certificate may be issued to a candidate
who has completed and met all requirements of a state-approved educator preparation program or has
satisfied the requirements of W. Va. Code §18A-3-2a. Out-of-state candidates are required to meet the
requirements in section 16. The Professional Teaching Certificate shall be endorsed to indicate the
specialization(s) and grade levels, identified in Appendix A, that the certificate holder is authorized to be
assigned to teach in the public schools.

10.1.c.2. Conditions for Issuance. The candidate for the Professional Teaching Certificate is
required to submit documentation that they have met the criteria in accordance with section 9 and be
recommended for a Professional Teaching Certificate by the employing county superintendent; and

10.1.c.2.A. WVBE-Adopted Tests. Unless the candidate is exempt, the educator is
required to meet the minimum proficiency level(s) or any alternative specified in the directory or the West
Virginia CTE Endorsement and Testing Manual approved by the WVBE for:

10.1.c.2.A.1. The required Pre-Professional Skills Tests in reading, writing, and

mathematics;

21
