126CSR136

10.5.a.3. Validity Period. The Professional Business Official Certificate is valid for a period of
three years and expires on June 30 of the last year of its validity.

10.5.a.4. Renewal. The candidate for licensure is required to provide documentation that
they meet the following criteria: completed 15 clock hours annually of professional learning activities
with credit offered, or approved by, the WVDE for a total of 45 hours completed at the time of renewal
unless otherwise approved by the WVDE; and, be recommended for renewal by the employing county
superintendent in the county the candidate is, or was, employed.

10.5.b. Professional Accountant Certificate.

10.5.b.1. General Criteria. A Professional Accountant Certificate may be issued to a candidate
employed for a specific assignment who has completed a minimum of a BA through an accredited IHE;
the general requirements specified in section 9; the minimum GPA specified in section 9.11; and, the
conditions for issuance specified in section 10.5.

10.5.b.2. Conditions for Issuance. A candidate for the Professional Accountant Certificate is
required to submit documentation that they meet the following criteria: holds a minimum of a BA,
including 24 semester hours of coursework in accounting completed with a minimum of 2.50 GPA; and be
recommended for a Professional Accountant Certificate by the county superintendent based on the
candidate being the most qualified candidate for the position.

10.5.b.3. Validity Period. The Professional Accountant Certificate is valid for three years and
expires on June 30 of the last year of its validity.

10.5.b.4. Renewal. A candidate for licensure is required to submit documentation that they
meet the following criteria: completed six clock hours annually of professional learning activities with
credit offered, or approved, by the WVDE for a total of 18 hours at the time of renewal unless otherwise
approved by the WVDE and be recommended for renewal by the employing county superintendent in the
county the candidate is, or was, employed.

10.5.c. Professional School Nutrition Director Certificate.

10.5.c.1. General Criteria. A Professional School Nutrition Director Certificate may be issued
to acandidate employed for the management of the day-to-day operations of school food service who
has completed a minimum of a BA through an accredited IHE; holds a valid Authorization for School
Nutrition Director; meets the general requirements specified in section 9; the minimum GPA specified in
section 9.11; and the conditions for issuance specified in section 10.5.

10.5.c.2. Conditions for Issuance. A candidate for the Professional School Nutrition Director
Certificate is required to submit documentation that they meet the following criteria: holds a minimum
of a BA in an area approved by the WVDE; a Nutrition Specialist Credentialing (SNS) issued by the School
Nutrition Association (SNA); have a minimum of two years of professional experience in school nutrition
or related area approved by the WVDE; and be recommended for a Professional Nutrition Director
Certificate by the county superintendent based on the candidate being the most qualified candidate for
the position.

38
