126CSR136

15.4. Conversion of the Alternative Teaching Certificate to a Provisional Alternative Certificate. A
candidate applying to convert their Alternative Teaching Certificate to a Provisional Alternative Certificate
is required to submit documentation that they meet the following criteria: successful completion of a
WVBE-approved program for alternative certification in accordance with Policy 5901; be recommended
by the employing county superintendent; have a minimum overall cumulative 2.50 GPA; and, have the
minimum proficiency scores for all WVBE-required competency exam(s) as applicable to the
endorsement(s) being sought for general education and/or special education for all endorsements held
and for professional education as specified in the directory or meet a qualifying exemption established
in section 10.

15.5. Renewal of a Provisional Alternative Certificate requires the candidate to meet all
requirements established in section 10.1.d and may be renewed twice.

15.6. A Provisional Alternative Certificate may be converted to an Initial Professional Teaching
Certificate if it meets the requirements established in section 10.1.d.5.

§126-136-16. Out-of-State Candidates.

16.1. Interstate Agreement for Qualifications of Educational Personnel. West Virginia is a member
of the NASDTEC that promotes the mobility of educators across state and national borders utilizing
consistent standards for certification for education personnel. Although West Virginia participates in this
interstate compact agreement, specific requirements for issuing certifications to out-of-state candidates
are established in section 16.2 and section 16.3 in accordance with W. Va. Code §18A-3-1(b). W. Va. Code
§18A-3-2a(1) provides for the certification of a candidate meeting equivalent standards at IHEs in other
states who has passed the appropriate WVBE-approved basic skills and subject-matter tests; has
completed three years of successful full-time experience in a public school within the last seven years in
the area the licensure is being sought; or, has completed the WVBE-approved alternative route to
certification established in section 15.

16.2. Recognition of Out-of-State Certificates. A Professional Teaching, Administrative, or Student
Support Certificate for employment in a West Virginia pubic school may be issued to an eligible out-of-
state candidate that submits documentation that they meet the following criteria: holds a valid
out-of-state certificate equivalent to the Professional Teaching, Administrative, or Professional Certificate
of eligibility issued by another state that meets all of the requirements of that state for full certification
except employment; has graduated from an approved teacher education program at an accredited IHE or
EPP approved in the licensing state; and, passes a criminal history record check conducted by the West
Virginia State Police and the FBI as required by W. Va. Code §18A-3-10 and section 9.2 (for individuals who
hold a valid Out-of-State certificate in the area of CTE, refer to the requirements for the CTE Certificate
in section 10). Eligible candidates who meet the requirements established in section 10.1.d.5, except
coursework or 10.1.e, may be issued an initial Professional Teaching Certificate.

16.2.a. Exception. A candidate licensed in another state may use five years of full-time teaching
experience in one or more area(s) of endorsement on the certificate to meet licensing requirements. A
candidate who successfully completed a nationally normed TPA adopted by the licensing state may be
exempt from the TPA requirement for conversion established in section 10,1.b.5.A.

79
