126CSR136

11.12.bb.4.A. Completion of Six semester hours or two courses approved by the WVDE
completed after the issuance of the certificate being renewed and within the three-year period
immediately preceding the date of application; and,

11.12.bb.4.B. Recommendation. Be recommended by the West Virginia National Guard
and the county superintendent where the candidate is placed.

11,12.cc. Permanent Future Leaders Authorization. A candidate for a permanent authorization
is required to submit documentation that they meet the following criteria:

11.12.cc.1. Education. Holds a minimum of a high school diploma or its equivalent;

11.12.cc.2. Experience. Service in the armed forces with at least four years of active or
reserve experience;

11.12.cc.3. Coursework. Completion of 18 hours of WVDE-approved coursework; and

11.12.cc.4. Credentials. Held the three-year Future Leaders Program authorization twice for
the entire validity period;

11.12.cc.5. Completion of a minimum of five years of experience under the Future Leaders
credential in a West Virginia public school; and,

11.12.cc.6. Be recommended for a Permanent Future Leaders Authorization by the West
Virginia National Guard and the county superintendent where the candidate will be performing duties.

11.12.dd. For issuance of a Permanent Authorization for Driver Education. A candidate is
required to submit documentation that they meet the criteria in accordance with section 10; holds a valid
West Virginia Professional Certificate that includes grades 9-12 or 9-Adult; has held a valid motor vehicle
operator’s license continuously for the past five years with a satisfactory driving record certified by the
DMV in each state where the candidate has been licensed during the past three years; has not
accumulated nine or more points on the candidate’s driving record from a DMV at any time during the
past five years; has not been convicted of and/or the subject of a license suspension or revocation by a
DMV, for a charge of operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, controlled
substances, any other drugs or the combination thereof, or by clear and convincing evidence including,
but not limited to, breath test results, blood test results, or field sobriety test results, has not operated a
motor vehicle under the influence of the same; or,

11.12.dd.1. A candidate holding a valid West Virginia Professional Teaching Certificate may
apply and be issued a permanent authorization in driver education provided the candidate submits
documentation that they meet the following criteria: held a valid motor vehicle operator's license for the
past five years; is in good health and free from impairments that would adversely affect the safety of
students and the public; has a satisfactory driving record confirmed by a DMV; has not accumulated
more than nine points on the individual’s DMV record at any time during the past five years; has not been
convicted and/or the subject of a license suspension or revocation by a DMV for a charge of operating a
motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, controlled substance, any other drugs or the
combination thereof, and has not operated a motor vehicle while under the influence of the same as
established by a preponderance of evidence including, but not limited to, breath test results, blood test

67
