126CSR136

documentation that they meet the following criteria: verification of enrollment in an in-state, or out-of-
state, approved preparation program;

11.8.b.1. Criminal History Record Check. All candidates for the Clinical Experience Permit
whose applications are received by the WVDE shall be fingerprinted by the West Virginia State Police, or
its designee, in accordance with section 9, unless the candidate holds a valid credential issued by the
WVDE. Provided, the criminal history record check may not be used for subsequent applications for other
credentials issued by the State Superintendent; and,

11.8.b.2. Required Testing. A candidate is required to pass WVBE-required testing in
accordance with section 10.1.c.2.A unless a qualifying exemption established in section 10.1. is met, or
the candidate has attempted the content Praxis examination at least twice without meeting the required
cut score and the candidate has at least aB average in the content area in which they will be applying for
licensure and completing a clinical placement; and, receives the recommendation of program officials that
the candidate meets the proficiency requirements necessary to enter the clinical experience, may be
issued a Restricted Clinical Experience Permit. The EPP is required to submit a Focused Supervision Plan
for the candidate before a permit may be issued.

11.8.b.2.A. A candidate must pass test(s) required for basic skills and content proficiency.
Provided, a candidate enrolled in a state-approved EPP resulting in an MA is exempt from basic skills
proficiency testing requirements for the Clinical Experience Permit unless the candidate meets an
exemption specified in the directory.

11.8.b.2.B. An administrator candidate is required to pass test(s) required for content
proficiency.

11.8.b.2.C. A Student Support candidate is required to pass test(s) for content proficiency
and be recommended for a Clinical Experience Permit by the designated IHE official. Provided, a Speech
Language Pathologist candidate is exempt from this requirement and is not required to provide passing
content proficiency scores prior to completing the clinical experience; and,

11.8.b.2.C.1 Receive the recommendation of the county superintendent, Multi-
County CTE Administrator, or WVSDT Superintendent or designee for a Clinical Experience Permit.

11.8.c. Validity Period. The Clinical Experience Permit is valid for one school year and expires on
June 30. Upon verification from the IHE that the permit holder has successfully completed the clinical
experience, the Clinical Experience Permit is eligible to be used as a Short-Term Substitute Permit in the
endorsement area(s) in which the candidate is applying for certification including, but not limited to,
teacher certification, administrator certification, or student support certification.

11.9. Permit for Year-Long Residency.

11.9.a. General Criteria. A Short-Term or Long-Term Permit for a Year-Long Residency may be
issued to a candidate who meets the following criteria: is enrolled and in good standing in a WVBE-
approved EPP; will have satisfied the state-specific program requirements for residency in accordance
with Policy 5100 for clinical experience; has satisfied the general requirements established in section 9;
and has satisfied the conditions of issuance in accordance with section 11.8.b.

47
