126CSR136

Alternative Certification Programs for the Education of Teachers (Policy 5901). The alternative program
certificate is issued initially for one year and can be renewed twice for a total of three years of employment
under this certificate.

5.3. Career and Technical Education (CTE) Certificate. The CTE Certificate may be issued to a
candidate who has acquired prescribed CTE and/or technical skills through specific wage-earning
experience and/or WVBE-approved equivalent training recognized in the West Virginia CTE Endorsement
and Testing Manual maintained on the WVDE website, within the specialization(s) and grade level(s)
designated on this certificate. The CTE Certificate is equivalent to the Professional Certificate for salary
purposes only.

5.4. Temporary Career Technical Education (CTE) Certificate. The Temporary CTE Certificate may be
issued to a candidate who has been offered employment and holds a valid out-of-state CTE certificate but
does not hold the required industry-recognized credential, five years of teaching experience within the
specialization and/or met the testing requirements required for issuance of the CTE Certificate. The
Temporary CTE Certificate may also be issued to an educator who holds a valid West Virginia Professional
Teaching Certificate and has been offered employment in a CTE position, provided the individual meets
the general criteria for an Initial CTE Certificate as specified in section 10.4, except for obtaining the
specified credential identified in the West Virginia CTE Endorsement and Testing Manual.

5.5. Temporary Teaching Certificate. The Temporary Teaching Certificate may be issued to a
candidate who does not meet the requirements for a Professional Teaching Certificate but has obtained
employment in a West Virginia public school that meets the issuance criteria.

5.6. Permit. The Permit may be issued to a candidate who does not meet the requirements for the
Professional or CTE Certificate but has been determined by a county superintendent to be the most
qualified candidate for the position. The Non-United States Citizen Permit may be issued to a Non-United
States citizen in accordance with section 17 of this policy unless the candidate meets the conditions
specified in section 17.1.

5.7. Adult Certificates and Adult Permits. The Adult Certificate may be endorsed for Adult Education
(formerly Adult Basic Education). The Adult Permit is required to instruct career technical education to
adults in designated adult programs only for endorsements identified in the West Virginia CTE
Endorsement and Testing Manual available on the WVDE website, including the endorsements for Adult
Education’s Public Service Training including, but not limited to, Emergency Medical Services (EMS), or
Fire Service Training.

5.8. Authorization. The Authorization may be issued to a candidate who does not meet the criteria
for any of the credentials in accordance with section 5.1 through section 5.7 or is assigned to a position
for which a specialization related to public school instruction or a public school program does not exist on
the Professional or CTE Certificate. A Temporary or Permanent Authorization that requires a Professional
Certificate as a prerequisite shall be valid provided the Professional Certificate remains valid in accordance
with section 11.12.

5.9. Paraprofessional Certificate. The Paraprofessional Certificate may be issued to a candidate who
meets the required academic or equivalent standards and/or experience to work in a support capacity to
assist in the facilitation of instruction and supervision of students while under the direction of a
professional educator. An educator who holds a valid out-of-state or a valid or expired West Virginia

10
