126CSR136

12.4.c. Certification for Grades PK through 3. Candidates who hold a Permanent
Paraprofessional Certificate endorsed for PK-Adult are eligible to apply for a PK-3 endorsement to their
Permanent Paraprofessional Certificate by completing the required WVDE-approved coursework that
shallinclude early childhood literacy science of reading, and early childhood numeracy or WVDE-approved
post-secondary coursework equivalent to three semester hours. A person holding a Permanent
Paraprofessional Certificate without a PK-3 certification is prohibited from being employed in grade 1-3
classrooms.

12.5. Certificate for Paraprofessional Educators. Educational Sign Language Interpreter | and II.
12.5.a. Initial Paraprofessional Certificate Educational Sign Language Interpreter |.

12.5.a.1. General Criteria. An initial Paraprofessional Certificate Educational Sign Language
Interpreter | may be issued to a candidate meeting the requirements in section 12.4.a and section 12.4.b;
or, section 12.4.b.8 or its equivalent. A passing score on the Educational Interpreter Performance
Assessment-Written Test (EIPA-WT) satisfies the general conditions for issuance if the candidate submits
documentation that they meet the following criteria: completed three semester hours of reading; three
semester hours each of special education, human growth and development or psychology, and social
studies; and, nine semester hours of electives related to public instruction or its equivalent.

12.5.a.2. Conditions of Issuance. A candidate for an Initial Paraprofessional Certificate for
Educational Sign Language Interpreter | is required to submit documentation that they meet one of the
following criteria: had a minimum score of 3.00 on the Educational Interpreter Proficiency Assessment
(EIPA); holds a valid National Association of the Deaf (NAD) Certification-Level Ill or higher; avalid Registry
of Interpreters for the Deaf (RID) Certification; a valid National Interpreter Certification (NIC), or a valid
state Quality Assurance Screening (QAS) Level Il.

12.5.a.3. Validity Period. An Initial Paraprofessional Certificate for Educational Interpreter
that is effective on or after January 1 may be issued as an Initial Paraprofessional Certificate Educational
Interpreter valid until June 30 of the following school year. An Initial Paraprofessional Certificate
Educational Interpreter may only be renewed twice.

12.5.a.4. Renewal of an Initial Paraprofessional Certificate for Educational Sign Language
Interpreter |. A candidate for an initial Paraprofessional Certificate is required to provide documentation
that they meet the following criteria: completion of a minimum of 15 clock hours of WVDE-approved
professional learning activities; beginning July 1, 2021, completion of trauma-informed best practices;
completion of the West Virginia Registry of Interpreters requirements; and, be recommended for an
initial Paraprofessional Certificate for Educational Sign Language Interpreter | by the employing county
superintendent; or, verification of assignment by the county superintendent if the candidate is performing
contractual services .

12.5.a.5. Specific Conditions for Issuance. A candidate for a Permanent Paraprofessional
Certificate for Educational Interpreter | is required to submit documentation that they meet one of the
following criteria: had aminimum score of 3.5 on the EIPA; has a valid NAD Certification-Level IV or higher;
a valid RID Certification; a valid NIC; or a valid state QAS Level Ill; achieved a passing score on the EIPA-
Written Test for Content Knowledge; completion of the West Virginia Registry of Interpreters
requirements; and, be recommended by the employing county superintendent; or verification of
assignment by the county superintendent if the candidate is performing contractual services.

74
