126CSR136

12.5.b. Permanent Paraprofessional Certificate for Educational Sign Language Interpreter II.

12.5.b.1. General Criteria. A Permanent Paraprofessional Certificate for Educational Sign
Language Interpreter II may be issued to a candidate meeting the requirements in section 12.5.a.1 and
section 12.5.b.2. A Permanent Paraprofessional Certificate-Educational Sign Language Interpreter ||
remains valid unless surrendered, suspended, or revoked.

12.5.b.2. Specific Conditions for Issuance. A candidate for the Permanent Paraprofessional
Certificate for Educational Interpreter II isrequired to submit documentation that they meet the following
criteria: had a minimum score of 3.5 on the EIPA; has a valid NAD Certification-Level IV or higher; a valid
RID Certification; a valid NIC; or a valid state QAS Level Ill; and achieved a passing score on the EIPA-
Written Test for Content Knowledge; completion of the West Virginia Registry of Interpreters
requirements; and, be recommended for a Permanent Paraprofessional Certificate for Educational
Interpreter || by the employing county superintendent.

12.5.c. Restricted Initial Paraprofessional Educational Sign Language Interpreter.

12.5.c.1. General Criteria. A candidate for a Restricted Initial Paraprofessional Educational
Interpreter must meet all issuance requirements in sections 12.5.a.1 and 12.5.b.2 except for the minimum
required assessment scores or certificate levels.

12.5.c.2. Conditions of Issuance. A candidate for a Restricted Initial Paraprofessional
Educational Sign Language Interpreter is required to submit documentation that they meet the following
criteria: has taken one of the required assessments a minimum of once; submitted a completed
Professional Development Plan; agreed to attend all WVDE-approved trainings as required by WVDE; and,
be recommended for a Restricted Initial Paraprofessional Educational Sign Language Interpreter
Certificate by the employing county superintendent.

12.5.c.3. Validity Period. A Restricted Initial Paraprofessional Certificate for Educational Sign
Language Interpreter is valid for one school year and may be renewed twice.

12.5.c.4._ Renewal of the Restricted Paraprofessional Certificate for Educational Sign
Language Interpreter. A candidate for renewal is required to submit documentation that they meet the
following criteria: completed a minimum of 15 clock hours of WVDE-approved professional learning
activities; beginning July 1, 2021, completion of trauma-informed best practices; submitted a completed
Professional Development Plan; completion of the West Virginia Registry of Interpreters requirements;
provided assessment scores annually demonstrating progress toward meeting the required scores
established in section 12.5.b.2; or if pending receipt of assessment results, the recommendation of the
5. and,
be recommended for renewal of the Restricted Paraprofessional Certificate by the employing county
superintendent.

designated WVDE official from the Office of Special Education may be used to demonstrate prog

12.6. Aide V. Special Education Assistant Teacher.
12.6.a. General Criteria. A Temporary Authorization for Special Education Assistant Teacher may

be issued to a candidate who is currently employed as a special education assistant teacher that has a
high school diploma, a WVBE-approved high school equivalent, or a degree, if applicable, through an

75
