126CSR136

time teaching experience including two years in the specialization(s) and one year minimum full-time in
a West Virginia public school or in an accredited private school in accordance with Policy 2330, completed
the Beginning Educator Internship and six semester hours of coursework from an accredited IHE with a
minimum 3.00 GPA in each course related to public education or WVDE WVLearns courses completed
subsequent to the issuance of the certificate being renewed and within the five-year period immediately
preceding the date of application; or is a minimum of 60 years old; or

10,1.g.1.C. Holds a Five-Year Professional Teaching Certificate, a Master’s Degree, and
completed five years of educational full-time teaching experience including two years in the
specialization(s) and one year minimum full-time in a West Virginia public school or in an accredited
private school in accordance with Policy 2330; and, completed the Beginning Educator Internship may
apply for a Permanent Professional Teaching Certificate after meeting experience requirements; or

10.1.g.1.C.1. Candidates who are certified through NBPTS may apply for a permanent
certification any time after the NBPTS designation is reflected on the professional teaching certificate; or

10.1.g.1.D. Hold a valid out-of-state certificate that reflects permanent status by the
issuing state, verification of a minimum of five years of full-time teaching experience in a public school in
the endorsement area(s) included on the valid certificate which is required to be verified by the
appropriate licensing agency or system set forth in section 16.2; and

10.1.g.1.E. Recommendation. _ If the candidate is currently employed by a county board
of education, multi-county CTE center, or WVSDT, the candidate must be recommended for a Permanent
Professional Teaching Certificate by the employing county superintendent. If the educator is not
employed by a county board of education, then the educator must secure a recommendation from a
personal or professional reference that is not related to, nor residing in, the same household as the
candidate.

10.1.g.2. Validity Period. The Permanent Professional Teaching Certificate shall remain valid
unless it is surrendered, suspended, or revoked.

10.2. Professional Administrative Certificate.
10.2.a. Provisional Administrative Certificate.

10.2.a.1. General Criteria. A Provisional Administrative Certificate may be issued to a
candidate who meets the following criteria: holds the minimum degree specified in Appendix A through
an accredited IHE or an equivalent degree through an IHE in a foreign country or a valid out-of-state
certificate; the general requirements in accordance with section 9; the minimum GPA required in section
9.11; and has completed three years of valid administrative/management level experience or teaching
experience as defined in section 4 . The Provisional Administrative Certificate shall be endorsed for
Superintendent, Principal, and/or General Supervisor of Instruction and shall indicate the specialization(s)
and grade levels the certificate holder is authorized to be assigned to in the public schools. Experience
acquired under the Provisional Administrative Certificate may be used to satisfy conversion requirements.

10.2.a.1.A. An individual holding a Provisional Administrative Certificate may be
employed as an administrator in a West Virginia public school and is authorized to perform observations

27
