126CSR136

11.7. Clinical Teacher of Record (CTR) Permits.

11.7.a. General Criteria. A CTR permit may be issued to a candidate who meets the following
criteria: is enrolled ina WVBE-approved CTR program in accordance with an agreement between an IHE
and a county board of education; has satisfied the general requirements in accordance with section 9; has
satisfied the clinical experience test requirements specified in Policy 5100; and has satisfied the conditions
for issuance in accordance with section 11.

11.7.b. Conditions for Issuance. The candidate for the CTR Permit is required to submit
documentation that they meet the following criteria:

11.7.b.1. Verification of enrollment in an approved CTR program and verification that the
position was posted;

11.7.b.2. Background Check. All candidates for the Clinical Experience Permit whose initial
applications are received by the WVDE, or the candidate is reapplying within 12 months of the first
application without interruption in the preparation shall be fingerprinted by the West Virginia State Police,
or its designee, in accordance with section 9, unless the candidate holds a valid credential issued by the
WVDE. Provided, the criminal history record check may not be used for subsequent applications for other
credentials issued by the State Superintendent; and,

11.7.b.3. Recommendation of the designated IHE official and the county superintendent in
the county in which the candidate will serve as the CTR.

11.7.c. Validity Period. The CTR Permit shall be valid for one school year and expires on June 30.
11.8. Clinical Experience Permit.

11.8.a. General Criteria. Permits for Clinical Experiences may be issued to teachers,
administrators, and student support candidates that that meet the following criteria:

11.8.a.1. Enrolled and in good standing in a WVBE-approved preparation program or in an
out-of-state accredited IHE in accordance with section 4;

11.8.a.2. The program has a current agreement with the county board of education, which
includes the supervision of the candidate by an educator who holds a valid West Virginia Professional
Teaching Certificate in the endorsement area(s) of the permit, prior to placement in a West Virginia public
or non-public school, in accordance with Policy 5100, for the clinical experience but may not have yet
obtained a BA; and,

11.8.a.3. will have satisfied the state-specific program requirements for the area in which the
candidate is applying for licensure prior to clinical placement; the general requirements specified in
section 9; and the conditions of issuance in accordance with section 11; or, meet the exemptions defined
in section 4.

11.8.b. Conditions for Issuance. The candidate for the Clinical Experience Permit may apply
during the semester prior to the beginning of the clinical experience assignment and is required to submit

46
