126CSR136

11.3.b.1.B. For the endorsement area of school psychologist, the designated official at the
IHE through which the program is being completed is required to verify that the candidate has completed
a minimum of 70 percent of the state-approved program in the specialization(s) for which the permit is
requested; the candidate is currently enrolled in coursework; and, submit the Professional Commitment
Form verifying the candidate’s enrollment in the state-approved program.

11.3.b.1.C. For the endorsement area of school counseling, the designated official at the
IHE through which the program is being completed is required to verify that the applicant has completed
a minimum of 30 percent or 21 graduate semester hours, whichever is greater, of the state-approved
program in school counseling where the candidate has commenced pre-clinical/field experience
coursework; the candidate is currently enrolled in coursework; and, submit the Professional Commitment
form verifying the applicant’s enrollment in the state-approved program.

11.3.b.1.C.1. Individuals who have previously completed a master's degree from an
accredited college or university in a clinical counseling discipline and are enrolled in a state-approved
master’s program in school counseling to complete the additional courses specific to school counseling
are exempt from the minimum 30 percent or 21 graduate semester hour requirement.

11.3.b.1.C.2. All individuals employed under this credential are required to be directly
supervised by a fully licensed school counselor or a WVDE-approved designee.

11.3.b.2. WVBE-Adopted Tests. Unless identified as an exemption in section 10.1, a candidate
is required to satisfy the minimum proficiency levels or any identified option as specified in the directory
as approved by the WVBE for the Content Specialization Test(s) for each specialization for which the
permit is requested unless the candidate holds a degree in the content area requested; is enrolled in a
WVBE-approved program that provides in-classroom pedagogical and content support; or, is enrolled in
a WVBE-approved program in the requested content area and has completed a minimum of 25 percent
of the required content coursework in that program as verified by the candidate’s program official.

11.3.c. Validity Period. The First-Class/Full-Time Permit for Professional Teaching and Student
Support Personnel is valid for one school year and expires on June 30. Provided, an educator employed
on or after January 1, may be issued a First Class/Full-Time Permit for Professional Teaching and Student
Support Personnel Permit that is valid until June 30 of the following school year.

11.3.d. Renewal of the First-Class/Full-Time Permit for Professional Teaching and Student
Support Personnel. Candidates who continue to be employed in the specialization(s) reflected on the
permit are required to submit documentation that they are enrolled in coursework in the endorsement
area and that they meet the following criteria:

11.3.d.1. Coursework. Completion of six semester hours of required coursework from, or
approved by, the accredited IHE where the candidate is completing the approved licensure program
reflecting a minimum 3.00 GPA towards the approved program or a BSN degree; submission of the
Professional Commitment form verifying the candidate’s enrollment in the state-approved program or
that they are currently completing the BSN program; and be recommended for renewal by the employing
county superintendent based on the candidate being, most qualified candidate for the position.

42
