126CSR136

11.1.b. Conditions of Issuance. A candidate for a Restricted Pre-Professional Permit is required
to submit documentation that they meet the following: holds a minimum of a BA, including completion
of an approved preparation program from an accredited IHE with the exception of passing scores for the
content assessment and a minimum of 2.50 GPA; and is recommended for a Pre-Professional Permit by
the county superintendent based on the candidate, being the most qualified candidate for the position.

11.1.c. Validity Period. The Restricted Pre-Professional Permit is valid for one year and may not
be renewed.

11.2. Novice Teacher Permit.

11.2.a. General Criteria. The Novice Teacher Permit may be issued to a candidate who is enrolled
in the WVDE Novice Teacher program.

11.2.b. Conditions for Issuance. The applicant for the Novice Teacher Permit must submit
documentation that they meet the following criteria: holds a minimum of a BA from an accredited
institution with a minimum cumulative 2.50 GPA; has a minimum of five years full-time successful
substitute teaching experience as defined in this policy in a West Virginia public school; achieved passing
score on all required basic skills assessments or meet state minimum requirements for basic skills; and,
be recommended for the permit by the last two supervising administrators and/or county officials.

11.2.c. Validity Period. The Novice Teacher Permit shall be valid for one year and may be
renewed three times.

11.2.d. Renewal of the Novice Teacher Permit. To renew the Novice Teacher Permit the
candidate is required to submit documentation that they meet the following criteria: employed in a West
Virginia public school; be continually enrolled in the WVDE Novice Teacher program; received successful
evaluations for each year taught under the Novice Teacher Permit in the West Virginia Educator
Evaluation System with an earned performance rating of Emerging or above; and be recommended for
renewal by the supervising school administrator and the employing county superintendent.

11.2.e. Conversion of Novice Teacher Permit to an initial Professional Teaching Certificate. In
order to be issued an Initial Professional Teaching Certificate, a candidate is required to provide
documentation that they meet the following criteria: successful completion of the WVDE Novice Teacher
program, receive passing scores on all WVBE-required licensure assessments or meet exemption
requirements as listed in the directory; complete a WVBE-approved teacher performance assessment;
receive successful evaluations for each year taught under the Novice Teacher permit in the West Virginia
Educator Evaluation System with an earned performance rating of Emerging or above; completion of six
semester hours of coursework or have an MA+30, or a minimum of 60 years old.

11.3. First-Class/Full-Time Permit for Professional Teaching and Student Support Personnel.

11.3.a. General Criteria. The First-Class/Full-Time Permit for Professional Teaching and Student
Support Personnel may be issued for any specialization recognized on the Professional Teaching
Certificate or Professional Student Support Certificate. An initial First-Class/Full-Time Permit for
Professional Teaching and Student Support Personnel may be issued to a candidate employed for a
specific assignment who has completed a minimum of a BA through an accredited IHE; is enrolled in
coursework in a program leading to licensure in the endorsement area at an accredited IHE, meets the

40
