126CSR136

11.12.aa.4. Future Leader Certificate Annual Renewal. A candidate for annual renewal of a
Future Leader Certificate is required to provide documentation that they meet the following criteria:

11.12.aa.4.A. Coursework. Verification by the designated official at the college/university
or WVDE through which the WVDE-approved program is being completed that the candidate has
completed a minimum of six semester hours or its equivalent of the approved program; and,

11,12.aa.4.B. Recommendation. Be recommended for renewal by the West Virginia
National Guard and the county superintendent where the candidate is performing duties.

11.12.bb. Future Leaders Program Authorization. A candidate for licensure is required to submit
documentation that they meet the following criteria:

11.12.bb.1. General Criteria. A certificate to work in the public schools of West Virginia may
be issued to a candidate who is: a United States citizen or holds a valid Permanent Resident Card,
Employment Authorization Document (EAD), or work permit issued by the United States Citizenship and
Immigration Services (USCIS); of good moral character; physically, mentally, and emotionally qualified to
perform the assigned duties ; and, a minimum of 18 years old on or before October 1 of the year the
certificate is issued (W. Va. Code §18A-3-2a); and

11.12.bb.2. Conditions of Issuance. All candidates for an initial Future Leaders Program
Authorization whose applications are received by the WVDE shall be fingerprinted by the West Virginia
State Police or its designee. The fingerprints shall be analyzed by the State Police for a state criminal
history record check through the central abuse registry record and then forwarded to the FBI for a national
criminal history record check. Information contained in either the central abuse registry record or the FBI
record may be sufficient to warrant the denial of a certificate for cause (W. Va. Code §18A-3-2a) and (W.
Va. Code §18A-3-10). The candidate for a Future Leaders Program Authorization is required to submit
documentation that they meet the following criteria:

11.12.bb.2.A. Education. Holds a minimum of a high school diploma or its equivalent;

11.12.bb.2.B. Specialized Training. Successful completion of six semester hours of an
IHE’s educational pedagogy program; 12 hours of WVDE-approved WVLearns coursework; and, be
recommended for a license by the designated official at the IHE through which the program was

completed or holds a valid West Virginia Professional Teaching Certificate;

11.12.bb.2.C. Experience. Service in the armed forces with at least four years of active
or reserve experience; and,

11.12.bb.2.D. Recommendation. Be recommended by the West Virginia National Guard
and the county superintendent where the candidate will be performing duties.

11.12.bb.3. Validity Period. The Future Leaders Program Authorization is valid for three
years.

11.12.bb.4. Renewal of the Future Leaders Authorization. A candidate for renewal is
required to submit documentation that they meet the following criteria:

66
