126CSR136

professional certificate; has committed to completing the state-approved CTE Administrator coursework;
completion of a minimum of three years teaching or school-level administrator experience; and, be
recommended for an initial Temporary Authorization for CTE Administrator by the employing
Superintendent, Multi-County CTE Administrator, or WVSDT Superintendent or designee.. A Temporary
Authorization for CTE Administrator is valid for one year, expires on June 30, and may be renewed once.

11.12.2.1. Renewal of the Temporary Authorization for CTE Administrator. A candidate for
renewal is required to provide documentation that they meet the following criteria: verification of
progress completing the state-approved CTE administrator coursework; and, receive the
recommendation of the county superintendent. A Temporary Authorization for CTE Administrator may
be renewed once.

11.12.aa. Temporary Authorization for Future Leaders Program. A candidate for a Temporary
Authorization for Future Leaders Program is required to provide documentation that they meet the
following criteria:

11.12.aa.1. General Criteria. A certificate to work in West Virginia public schools may be
issued to a candidate who is: a United States citizen or holds a valid Permanent Resident Card,
Employment Authorization Document (EAD), or work permit issued by the United States Citizenship and
Immigration Services (USCIS); of good moral character; physically, mentally, and emotionally qualified to
perform assigned duties; and, was 18 years on or before October 1 of the year in which the certificate is
issued (W. Va. Code §18A-3-2a).

11.12.aa.2. Conditions of Issuance. All candidates for initial licensure whose applications are
received by the WVDE shall be fingerprinted by the West Virginia State Police or its designee. The
fingerprints shall be analyzed by the State Police for a state criminal history record check through the
central abuse registry record and then forwarded to the FBI for a national criminal history record check.
Information contained in either the central abuse registry record or the FBI record may warrant denial of
a certificate for cause (W. Va. Code §18A-3-2a) and (§18A-3-10). Additionally, all candidates are required
to provide documentation that they meet the following criteria:

11.12.aa.2.A. Education. Minimum of a high school diploma or its equivalent;
11.12.aa.2.B. Specialized Training. Completion of eligible substitute training;

11.12.aa.2.C. Experience. Service in the armed forces with at least four years of active or
reserve experience;

11.12.aa.2.D. Commitment. Commitment agreement to complete the WVDE-approved
pedagogy coursework for industry credentials; and,

11.12.aa.2.E. Recommendation. Be recommended by the West Virginia National Guard
and the county superintendent where the candidate will be performing duties.

11.12.aa.3. Validity Period. The Initial Future Leader Certificate is valid for one year, expires
on June 30 of the last year of its validity, and may be renewed year to year for a total of three years.

65
