126CSR136

10.1.e.5.A. Three semester hours of coursework from an accredited IHE with a minimum
3.00 GPA in each course related to the public education or WVDE WVLearns courses completed
subsequent to the issuance of the certificate being renewed and within the five-year period immediately
preceding the date of application; and

10.1.e.5.B. Recommendation. If the candidate is currently employed by a county board
of education, multi-county CTE center, or WVSDT, the candidate must be recommended for renewal by
the employing county superintendent. If the educator is not employed by a county board of education,
then the educator is required to secure a recommendation from a personal or professional reference that
is not related to, nor residing in the same household as, the candidate.

10.1.e.6. Renewal of a Professional Teaching Certificate issued for three years.

10.1.e.6.A. General Criteria. The application for renewal is required to be submitted after
January 1 of the year the certificate expires. The candidate for licensure is required to submit
documentation that they meet the following criteria:

10.1.e.6.A.1. Six semester hours of coursework from an accredited IHE with a
minimum 3.00 GPA in each course related to public education or WVDE WVLearns courses completed
subsequent to the issuance of the certificate being renewed and within the five-year period immediately
preceding the date of application; or a Master’s +30 salary classification, or be a minimum of 60 years old;
and;

10.1.e.6.B. Recommendation. If the candidate is currently employed by a county board
of education, multi-county CTE center, or WVSDT, the candidate must be recommended for renewal by
the employing county superintendent. If the educator is not employed by a county board of education,
then the educator must secure a recommendation from a personal or professional reference that is not
related to, nor residing in the same household as, the candidate.

10.1.f. Conversion of a Three-Year Professional Teaching Certificate to a Professional Five-Year
Teaching Certificate.

10.1.f.1. Conditions for Issuance. The candidate for licensure is required to submit
documentation that they meet the following criteria:

10.1.f.1.A. Coursework. Six semester hours of coursework from an accredited |HE with a
minimum 3.00 GPA in each course related to public education or WVDE WVLearns courses completed
subsequent to the issuance of the certificate being renewed and within the five-year period immediately
preceding the date of application; or a Master’s +30 salary classification, or minimum of 60 years old;

10.1.f.1.B. Beginning Educator Internship/Induction. Successful completion of a
Beginning Educator Internship/Induction (W. Va. Code §18A-3C-3) for classroom teachers, unless the
candidate has completed five years of full-time teaching experience while holding a valid professional
certificate in a public school in another state or in a non-public school that has been accredited through a
WVBE-approved accreditation agency in accordance with Policy 2330, or was initially licensed in West
Virginia prior to January 1, 1992, or is a candidate with five years of in-state full-time experience where a
county did not provide a mentor to the candidate during the first year of full-time experience with
documentation from that county explaining why a mentor was not assigned to the candidate; and,

25
