126CSR136

or expired Professional Teaching Certificate that has been expired for five years or less or its equivalent is
sufficient to satisfy this requirement; and,

12.1.b.2. Be recommended by their employer for an ECCAT | Authorization which shall be
either the employing county superintendent or the director of the employing collaborative community
program under contract with the employing county board of education.

12.1.c. Renewal of Initial ECCAT | Temporary Authorization. A candidate for renewal is required
to submit documentation that they meet one of the following : completion of unduplicated WVDE-
approved coursework equivalent to a minimum of three semester hours in the areas of early childhood
special education, child development, early childhood literacy, numeracy, which includes classroom and
behavior management and expectations; be newly hired and/or assigned to an ECCAT | position;
completion of semester hours for the Apprenticeship for Child Development Program (ACDS) verified by
a seal-bearing certificate; completion of semester hours for a CDA Credential verified by a CDA Advisor’s
signature; or, completion of approved CTE coursework; and,

12.1.c.1 Be recommended by their employer for an ECCAT | Authorization which shall be
either the employing county superintendent or the director of the employing collaborative community
program under contract with the employing county board of education.

12.1.d. Validity Period. An ECCAT | Temporary Authorization is valid for one school year and
may be renewed twice.

12.1.e. Grade Extension for Grades 1 through 3. Candidates who hold an ECCAT | Temporary
Authorization issued with an effective date prior to July 1, 2023, are eligible to apply for an endorsement
for grades 1-3 by completing the required WVDE-approved coursework that shall include early childhood
literacy science of reading, and early childhood numeracy.

12.2. ECCAT Il Permanent Authorization.

12.2.a. General Criteria. An ECCAT || Permanent Authorization may be issued to a candidate
performing duties in a pre-k through grade 3 classroom if the candidate is employed as an ECCAT II and
holds a high school diploma, WVBE-approved high school equivalent, or a degree, if applicable, through
an accredited IHE and has completed the required WVDE-approved coursework.

12.2.a.1. A person employed as an ECCAT in a pre-k through grade 3 program shall hold the
position of either ECCAT |, ECCAT II, or ECCAT Ill (W. Va. Code §18-5-18).

12.2.b. Conditions for Issuance. A candidate for an ECCAT || Permanent Authorization is
required to submit documentation that they meet the following criteria: a rigorous standard of quality
and demonstrated through a formal state-approved academic assessment that includes, but is not limited
to, ameasurement of the candidate’s subject matter knowledge and ability to assist in instructing reading,
writing, and mathematics as well as reading readiness, writing readiness, and mathematics readiness as
appropriate. A candidate who has passed the current state competency exam for aides, administered by
a county board of education; and developed (W. Va. Code §18A-4-8e), or has a valid or expired
Professional Teaching Certificate that has been expired for five years or less or its equivalent is sufficient
to meet this requirement; and,

70
