126CSR136

11.10.d.4.B. The criteria established in section 11.10.a.4.A.

11.10.d.5. Conversion of a Restricted Short-Term Substitute Permit. A candidate who has
completed five years of successful experience under the Restricted Short-Term Substitute Permit and
obtains minimum scores of 771 (Reading), 757 (Writing), and 775 (Math) in the Basic Skills California
Achievement Test may apply for an initial Short-Term Substitute Permit without meeting the bachelor’s
degree requirement.

11.10.e. College Instructor Permit.

11.10.e.1. General Criteria. The College Instructor Permit may be issued for any specialization
recognized on the Professional Teaching and Support Certificate. A Collegiate Instructor Permit may be
issued to a candidate employed for a specific assignment that meets the general requirements in
accordance with section 9 and the conditions of issuance established in this section.

11.10.e.2. Conditions for Issuance. A candidate for the College Instructor Permit is required
to provide documentation that they meet the following criteria:

11.10.e.2.A. College/University Coursework. Holds an MA degree in the content area in
which they have applied for the permit to be endorsed; and,

11.10.e.2.B. Experience. Verification of a minimum of three years of college/university
teaching experience in the area the endorsement is requested which must be the area of assignment by
the employing college/university; and be recommended for a Collegiate Instructor Permit by the county
superintendent on the basis that the candidate is the most qualified candidate for the position, and has
been offered employment by a county board of education whose local policy provides assurance that such
personnel are not a replacement for a fully state-certified educator.

11.10.e.3. Validity Period. The College Instructor Permit is valid for one school year, expires
on June 30 and may be renewed twice.

11.10.e.4. Renewal of the College Instructor Permit. A candidate applying to renew a
Collegiate Instructor Permit must be recommended by the county superintendent on the basis that the
candidate is the most qualified candidate for the position and has been offered employment by a county
board of education whose local policy provides assurance that such personnel are not a replacement for
a fully state-certified educator.

11.10.e.5. Conversion of the College Instructor Permit. A candidate may be issued a non-
transferable teaching certificate if they have completed a WVBE-Approved Alternative Certification
program required in accordance with Section 10.

11.10.f. Contractor/Volunteer or Other School Personnel Permit.
11.10.f.1. General Criteria. A county board of education may request that a Contractor/
Volunteer or Other School Personnel Permit may be issued to a candidate who will be providing any

services to students; may have unaccompanied contact with students; or, unaccompanied access to
school grounds when students are present.

54
