126CSR136

4.42. Graduate Credit. A graduate level credit earned through an accredited |HE approved to offer
graduate credit.

4.43. Hearing. A session held on an established day, at a specific time, for presenting evidence and
arguments before the Licensure Appeal Panel or the Professional Practice Panel of the West Virginia
Commission for Professional Teaching Standards.

4,44, Initial Certificate. The first certificate issued to a candidate by the WVDE in accordance with
Policy 5202 and W. Va. Code §18A-3-1.

4.45. Institution of Higher Education (IHE). A college or university accredited by the official
accrediting state agency in which the IHE is located, and by one of the regionally accrediting agencies
recognized by the Council for Higher Education (CHEA), by one of the National Faith-Related Accrediting
Organizations recognized by CHEA and the United States Department of Education (USDE), or by the
Accrediting Council for Independent Colleges and Schools, to award degrees at stipulated levels including,
but not limited to, BA, MA, and/or doctorate degrees.

4.46. Instructional Technology or Educational Technology. A research-based, systemic approach to
define, understand, design, utilize, implement, manage, and evaluate appropriate educational technology
applications, resources, and/or tools aligned with state-approved content standards for instruction
intended to improve student learning.

4.47. International Credential Evaluation. An official evaluation report of international credentials
that provides interpretation of international credentials and determination of the equivalency of
educational programs, awarded degrees, and/or grades achieved to international and/or United States
standards that demonstrates academic and/or professional achievement based on authentic documents
and produced by an international credential evaluation service recognized by the Association of
International Credential Evaluators or the National Association of Credential Evaluation Services.

4.48. Licensing Agency. The WVDE under the authority of the State Superintendent.

4.49. Long-Term Substitute. A licensed educator who temporarily replaces a person assigned to an
educator position for more than 30 consecutive instructional days.

4.50. Master’s Degree (MA). A master’s degree related to public education earned at an accredited
IHE approved to offer graduate coursework, which has been issued to, or the requirements have been
met for a master’s degree related to public education, by a candidate who qualifies for, or holds, a
Professional Certificate or its equivalent.

4.51. Master’s Degree plus 15 (MA+15). A master’s degree related to public education earned
through an accredited IHE plus an additional 15 semester hours of approved graduate coursework from
an accredited IHE. This classification requires a total of 45 semester hours including a master’s degree
and shall be recognized only in the Professional Certificate or its equivalent.

4.52. Master’s Degree plus 30 (MA+30). A master’s degree related to public education earned
through an accredited IHE plus an additional 30 semester hours of approved graduate coursework from
an accredited IHE. This classification requires a total of 60 semester hours including a master’s degree
and shall be recognized only on the Professional Certificate or its equivalent.
