126CSR136

Certificates and a First Class Permit for full-time employment seeking an additional endorsement in a
shortage area, and resides in the state or is employed regularly for instructional purposes in a West
Virginia public school; or is seeking certification renewal, and has a continuing contract with a county
board of education or eligible public school employment. Provided, tuition reimbursement is contingent
upon available funding through legislative appropriations.

23.1.b. Limitations. Reimbursement for coursework is limited to the cost of tuition, registration,
and other required fees for appropriate college/university coursework used for certificate renewal or in a
verified shortage area. Reimbursement for an educator who attends an out-of-state IHE (W. Va. Code
§18A-3-3a(d)(2)), or a private IHE is limited to the amount of the highest corresponding tuition charged at
a West Virginia state-supported IHE. Reimbursement for coursework completed towards certification
renewal or in a shortage area is limited to 15 semester hours of courses. Reimbursement for coursework
completed in an area of critical shortage takes precedent over coursework completed for renewal (W. Va.
Code §18A-3-3a(f)). For reimbursement of shortage area coursework, the shortage area must be verified
by the county of employment and the educator must have the appropriate IHE coursework with a
minimum 3.00 GPA.

23.1.c. Reimbursement Schedule. A request for tuition reimbursement must be received by the
WVDE between July 1 and June 15 of each fiscal year for coursework completed during that fiscal year.
Tuition reimbursement is provided on a first-come, first-served basis and contingent on available
funding. Coursework completed prior to the beginning of a fiscal year will not be considered for state
tuition reimbursement.

23.1.d. Third-Party Reimbursement. An educator who receives a tuition and/or fee waiver is not
eligible for reimbursement by the WVDE for the tuition/fees covered by the subsidy. Only expenses
incurred personally by the educator are reimbursable.

23.2. Reimbursement for National Board for Professional Teaching Standards (NBPTS) Certification.

23.2.a. The purpose of this reimbursement is to recognize and reward classroom teachers, as
defined in W. Va. Code §18A-1-1, who achieve certification through the NBPTS, by providing financial
assistance to participating classroom teachers.

23.2.b. Limitations. The number of teachers reimbursed in any fiscal year is contingent on
available funding provided by legislative appropriation for that fiscal year.

23.2.c. Third-Party Reimbursement. A classroom teacher who receives a subsidy from the
NBPTS, or any other third-party payer, is not eligible for reimbursement by the WVDE for the fees covered
by the subsidy. Only expenses incurred personally by the teacher are reimbursable.

23.2.d. Reimbursement Schedule. For initial NBPTS board certification, a classroom teacher may
be reimbursed once for enrollment and once for completion of the NBPTS Certification Program. Program
completion shall be defined as the completion of four components verified by the NBPTS. The program
must be completed within the general timeframe permitted by the NBPTS unless an extension for program
completion is granted by the NBPTS. For NBPTS board certification Maintenance of Certification (MOC),
a teacher who successfully maintains the NBPTS certification shall be reimbursed for the NBPTS MOC fees,
upon application to the WVDE.

92
