126CSR136

11.10.f.2. Conditions for Issuance. A candidate for the Contractor/Volunteer or Other School
Personnel Permit is required to submit documentation that they are being recommended for a
Contractor/Volunteer or Other School Personnel Permit by the county superintendent in which they will
be working. For the initial issuance and the renewal of the permit, the candidate shall be fingerprinted
by the West Virginia State Police or its designee. The fingerprints shall be analyzed by the State Police for
a state criminal history record check through the central abuse registry record and then forwarded to the
FBI for a national criminal history record check. Information contained in either the central abuse registry
record, or the FBI record, may be sufficient to warrant a denial of a Contractor/Volunteer or Other School
Personnel Permit for cause (W. Va. Code §18A-3-2a) and (W. Va. Code §18A-3-10).

11.10.f.3. Validity Period. A Contractor/Volunteer or Other School Personnel Permit is valid
for one year; expires on June 30; and, may be renewed.

11.10.f.4. Renewal of a Contractor/Volunteer or Other School Personnel Permit. A county
board of education may request that a Contractor/Volunteer or other School Personnel Permit be
renewed for a candidate who will continue to provide any services to students; may have unaccompanied
contact with students; or, unaccompanied access to school grounds when students are present by
completing the appropriate application and permit.

11.11. Adult Credentials.

11.11.a. An Adult Certificate endorsed for Adult Education shall be valid for a maximum of five
years and expires on June 30 of the last year of its validity. A candidate for adult credentials is required
to submit documentation that they meet all the criteria established in section 11.10.b for an initial
certificate and section 11.10.c for renewal of the certificate.

11.11.b. Initial Adult Certificate Endorsed for Adult Education. A candidate applying for an initial
Adult Certificate Endorsed for Adult Education is required to submit documentation that they meet the
following criteria: holds a minimum of a BA from an accredited IHE; the general requirements in
accordance with section 9; achieved the minimum GPA specified in section 9; and be recommended for
an initial Adult Certificate endorsed for Adult Education by the superintendent of the employing county,
Multi-County CTE Administrator, Educational Services Cooperative Director (ESC), or WVSDT
Superintendent or designee. For community-based organizations or non-educational agencies, the WVDE
Adult Education Director may recommend a candidate for licensure.

11.11.c. Renewal of the Initial Adult Certificate Endorsed for Adult Education. A candidate
applying for renewal of the Adult Certificate Endorsed for Adult Education is required to submit
documentation that they meet the following criteria: completion of six semester hours of
college/university coursework reflecting a 3.00 GPA related to the public education, related to basic skills
content, or WVLearns courses through the WVDE; or is a minimum of 60 years old; and completion of the
adult education professional learning activities as prescribed in the West Virginia Adult Education
Instructor Handbook approved by the WVDE; and,

11.11.c.1. Be recommended for renewal of an initial Adult Certificate endorsed for Adult
Education by the WVDE Adult Education Director or the superintendent of the employing county, Multi-
County CTE Administrator, Educational Services Cooperative Director (ESC), or WVSDT Superintendent or
designee. For community-based organizations or non-educational agencies, the WVDE Adult Education
Director may recommend a candidate for renewal.

55
