126CSR136

4.20. Certificate. Any or all documents issued by the licensing agency to empower an individual to
perform designated services within the public schools of West Virginia.

4.21. Certificate Holder. Any individual who has been issued a credential through the WVDE under
the authority of the State Superintendent in accordance with Policy 5202 and W. Va. Code §18A-3-1.

4.22. Clinical Experience Permit. A credential issued to an educator candidate including, but not
limited to, teachers, administrators, and student support personnel, who are enrolled and in good
standing as part of an in-state or out-of-state approved preparation program at an accredited IHE that is
a party to a written agreement with a county board of education for the clinical experience placement.
This permit is not required for individuals who hold a valid or expired West Virginia Professional Teaching
Certificate, Administrative Certificate, Student Support Certificate, or a valid First-Class/Full-Time Permit,
Alternative Teaching Certificate, Provisional Alternative Certificate, Out-of-Field Authorization, Clinical
Teacher of Record (CTR), or Clinical Residence Permit.

4.22.a. Candidates may or may not have yet obtained a BA and are required to obtain this permit
prior to beginning a clinical experience in a West Virginia public or non-public school in accordance with
Policy 5100, Approval of Educator Preparation Programs (Policy 5100).

4.22.b. This permit shall not be considered an initial certificate since eligible candidates have not
completed all program requirements for initial licensure.

4.23. Clinical Teacher of Record (CTR). A credential issued to an individual who meets specific
requirements of a state-approved preparation program at an IHE that has a current agreement with a
county board of education in West Virginia for student placement which has been authorized by the
WVBE, has completed required testing, and who may not have yet obtained a BA. This permit shall not
be considered an initial certificate since eligible candidates have not completed all program requirements
for initial licensure.

4.24. Community Programs. Early childhood education services provided in natural environments
for children aged three to five. These include, but are not limited to, public or private childcare settings,
private preschools, and Head Start. Community programs complement early childhood education services
operated directly by county boards of education.

4.25. CTE Program of Study. A CTE program of study is the focused study of knowledge, and skills
required for specific occupations and reflects specific endorsements recognized on the credential.

4.26. Conversion. The process of an educator completing requirements to upgrade from one level
of certificate to another level.

4.27. County Board of Education. The entity responsible for supervising and controlling public
schools in the district (W. Va. Code §18-5-1 et. Seq).

4.28. County Superintendent. The chief administrative officer of a county board of education in
West Virginia.

4.29. Day. Calendar day.
