126CSR136

23.2.e. Procedures and processes for NBPTS Fee Reimbursement. (W. Va. Code §18A-4-2a(d)),
fee reimbursements shall be processed and distributed as follows: one-half of the program fee shall be
paid for reimbursement once to a teacher enrolled in the NBPTS certification program that submits an
application that includes documentation verifying enrollment, the payment for two components, and the
registration fee; the remaining one-half of the program fee shall be paid for reimbursement once to a
teacher who submits an application that includes documentation verifying payment for the final two
components, the registration fee, and submission of all four components to the NBPTS for final scoring.
Additionally, MOC fee reimbursement is available for each successful MOC as verified by the NBPTS. An
application for fee reimbursement must be received by the WVDE no later than June 15 annually.

23.2.f. Extra expenses reimbursement. A classroom teacher who achieves NBPTS Certification
is eligible for reimbursement of the actual expenses incurred for initial National Board Certification only
and a maximum of $600.00 for non-durable goods as specified in the Internal Revenue Service (IRS)
guidelines by applying for reimbursement and submitting documentation of the following: NBPTS board
certification, as verified by the NBPTS; original receipts for the expenses incurred; and, other
documentation that may be required. Any subsidy funding received by a teacher for retake fees is
considered as partial or complete payment of the $600.00 allowance permitted for actual expenses
incurred.

23.2.g. NBPTS Salary Supplement. A classroom teacher who becomes NBPTS certified shall
receive an annual salary supplement of $3,500.00 for the life of the certificate, up to five years for any
one certificate, if the teacher’s application includes documentation that they have become NBPTS
certified and are employed as a public school classroom teacher. The annual salary supplement shall be
in addition to any amounts prescribed in the applicable state minimum salary schedule the teacher is
entitled to receive, paid in equal monthly installments, and considered a part of the state minimum
salaries for teachers. The state salary supplement expires at the same time the NBPTS board certification
expires; therefore, a classroom teacher who successfully completes NBPTS MOC Certification is required
to apply for a salary supplement renewal.

23.2.h. NBPTS Certificate Recognition without Salary Supplement. An individual who is NBPTS
certified but is not currently employed as a classroom teacher in West Virginia public schools, may request
recognition of the NBPTS certification with a valid West Virginia Professional Teaching Certificate. The
NBPTS salary supplement is only available to employed, fully certified West Virginia public school
classroom teachers.

23.3. Reimbursement and Salary Supplement for Professional Personnel with Recognized National
Certification in Speech Language Pathology, Counseling, School Psychology, and School Nursing General
Criteria.

23.3.a. The purpose of this section is to recognize and reward certain professional personnel, as
defined in W. Va. Code §18A-1-1, holding advanced certification by the ASHA, the National Board of
Certified Counselors (NBCC), the West Virginia Board of Examiners in Counseling (WVBEC)}, the National
Association of School Psychologists (NASP), or the National Board for Certification of School Nurses
(NBCSN), that meet eligibility criteria (W. Va. Code §18A-4-2b) by providing a statewide salary
supplement and reimbursement program for fees and actual extra expenses incurred toward attainment
of their initial advanced certification for professional personnel employed in the public schools as SLPs,
counselors, school psychologists, or school nurses.

93
