126CSR136

preceding the date of application; or hold an MA+30 salary classification based on the awarding of a MA;
or is a minimum of 60 years old; and,

10.2.b.4.B.2. Recommendation. If the candidate is currently employed by a county
board of education, multi-county CTE center, or WVSDT, the candidate must be recommended for
renewal by the employing county superintendent. If the educator is not employed by a county board of
education, then the educator must secure a recommendation from a personal or professional reference
that is not related to, nor residing in the same household as, the candidate.

10.2.c. Permanent Professional Administrative Certificate.

10.2.c.1. Conditions for Issuance. In order to convert the initial Professional Administrative
Certificate to a Permanent Professional Administrative Certificate, the candidate for licensure is required
to submit documentation that they meet the following criteria:

10.2.c.1.A. Five years of educational experience, two years of which must be in any, or a
combination of, the specialization(s) reflected on the Professional Administrative Certificate, and have
completed one year in a West Virginia public school or in a non-public school that has been accredited
through a WVBE-approved accreditation agency in accordance with Policy 2330; or,

10.2.c.1.A.1. Any candidate for superintendent, assistant superintendent, or
associate superintendent who has earned a doctorate degree from an accredited IHE and has either
completed three successful years of teaching in public education or acquired the equivalent of three years
of valid administrative/management experience or supervision as defined in section 4, after employment
by the county board of education and completion of the face-to-face Evaluation Leadership Institute may
be issued a permanent administrative certificate qualifying the candidate to be employed as a county
superintendent; and,

10.2.c.1.A.2. Recommendation. If the candidate is currently employed by a county
board of education, multi-county CTE center, or WVSDT, the candidate must be recommended for a
Permanent Professional Administrative Certificate by the employing county superintendent. If the
educator is not employed by a county board of education, then the educator must secure a
recommendation from a personal or professional reference that is not related to, nor residing in the same
household as, the candidate.

10.2.c.2. Validity Period. The Permanent Professional Administrative Certificate shall remain
valid unless it is surrendered, suspended, or revoked.

10.3. Professional Student Support Certificate.
10.3.a. Professional Student Support Certificate.

10.3.a.1. General Criteria. A Professional Student Support Certificate may be issued to a
candidate who has completed and met all requirements of a state-approved educator preparation
program or has satisfied the requirements established in W. Va. Code §18A-3-2a. Out-of-state candidates
are required to meet the requirements in section 16. The Professional Student Support Certificate shall
include an endorsement indicating the specialization(s) and grade level(s), identified in Appendix A, the
certificate holder is authorized to be assigned to in the public schools.

30
