126CSR136

results, or field sobriety test results, notwithstanding the lack of a conviction or a DMV suspension or
revocation; completion of an orientation program approved by the WVDE; completion of the approved
WVDE WVLearns Driver Education Authorization coursework and orientation program; and completes
completion of a field driving component under the supervision of a certified driver’s education teacher.
A candidate issued this credential is required to report any moving violations, including a DUI, to the WVDE
within 7 days of the incident.

11,12.dd.2. Restricted Content Endorsement. An Individual hired full-time by acounty board
of education as a Driver Education teacher who is currently enrolled in the WVDE WVLearns Driver
Education coursework may be issued a restricted Content Endorsement in Driver Education if they submit
documentation that they meet the following criteria: held a valid motor vehicle operator's license for the
past five years; is in good health and free from impairments that would adversely affect the safety of
students and the public; has a satisfactory driving record confirmed and approved through the by a
DMV; has not accumulated more than nine points on the individual’s DMV record at any time during the
past five years; has not been convicted and/or the subject of a license suspension or revocation by a
DMV for a charge of operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, controlled substance,
any other drugs or the combination thereof, and has not operated a motor vehicle while under the
influence of the same as established by a preponderance of evidence including, but not limited to, breath
test results, blood test results, or field sobriety test results, notwithstanding the lack of a conviction or a
DMV suspension or revocation. A Restricted Content Endorsement is valid for one year, is not eligible for
renewal, and only permits the license holder to provide in-class instruction to students. A Restricted
Content Endorsement does not permit a license holder to conduct field driving instruction to students. A
candidate issued this credential is required to report any moving violations, including a DUI, to the WVDE
within 7 days of the incident.

11.12.ee. Waivers are not applicable to section 11.12.dd.

11.12.ff. Temporary Authorization for Developmentally Delayed Special Education. A candidate
for a Temporary Authorization for Developmentally Delayed Special Education is required to submit
documentation that they meet the following criteria: holds a valid Professional Teaching Certificate
endorsed in an eligible area of Special Education; approval from WVDE's Office of Special Education; and,
be recommended by the employing county superintendent. A Temporary Authorization for
Developmentally Delayed Special Education is valid for one year and may be renewed if the candidate
continues to meet employment requirements and is recommended by the employing county
superintendent.

11.12.gg. Middle School Mathematics Authorization. A candidate for a Middle School
Mathematics Authorization is required to provide documentation that they meet the following
criteria: holds a valid Professional Teaching Certificate endorsed in Multi-subjects K-8, completion of the
WVDE-approved coursework, approval of the WVDE and is recommended by the employing county
superintendent. This authorization is valid for one year and may be renewed if the candidate continues
to meet employment requirements, completes required WVDE-coursework, is approved by the WVDE for
renewal, and, is recommended for renewal by the employing county superintendent.

11.13.hh. Autism Mentor Permanent Authorization.

68
