126CSR136

3.2. The licensure system defined in this policy supports the proposition that licensure patterns and
specializations should meet the needs of students and the mobility of qualified educational personnel.

§126-136-4. Definitions.

4.1. Academic Major. At least 21 semester hours of coursework from an accredited IHE acquired in
a single content area as identified on the official seal-bearing transcript, or verified by the IHE, from which
the individual earned a degree. The 21 semester hours of coursework are required to be part of the
candidate’s degree and must not include any semester hours of remedial coursework.

4.2. Advanced Credential. A certificate awarded to educators upon completion of specific
professional learning, coursework, and/or testing. For purposes of demonstrating subject matter
competence, the Advanced Credential may include, but is not limited to, Certification by the National
Board for Professional Teaching Standards (NBPTS), in content area, and/or a master’s degree (MA) or
doctorate (Ph.D., Ed.D.) in the content area.

4.3. Advanced Salary Classification. The upgrading of an educator’s salary classification to bachelor’s
plus 15 (BA+15), master’s (MA), master’s plus 15 (MA+15), master’s plus 30 (MA+30), master’s plus 45
(MA+45}, or doctorate.

4.4. Ancillary Requirements. For purposes of implementing the National Association of State
Directors of Teaching Education Certification (NASDTEC) Interstate Agreement, ancillary requirements
include, but are not limited to, minimum Grade Point Average (GPA), standardized testing or assessment,
Evaluation Leadership Institute (ELI), mentoring, experience, or graduation from an accredited IHE.

4.5. Appeal. A written request submitted by a candidate for an appeal of denial for cause in
accordance with section 6.2.h. The appellant is required to include in the appeal the basis for, and
evidence supporting, the appellant’s argument.

4.6. Approved Career Technical Education (CTE) Preparation Program. An educational training
program designed to prepare individuals to become educators specifically in CTE. This program provides
instruction in teaching methodologies, curriculum development, classroom management techniques, and
subject-specific content related to career and technical fields, based upon WVDE-adopted CTE program
objectives and other requirements, and endorsed by the WVBE.

4.7. Approved Program. An educational preparation program as defined in W. Va. 126CSR114, Policy
5100, Approval of Educator Preparation Programs (Policy 5100), and W. Va. 126CSR161, Policy 5901,
Regulations for Alternative Certification Programs for the Education of Teachers (Policy 5901).

4.8. Associate degree (AA). An associate degree from an accredited IHE which has been issued or
for which the requirements for have been met.

4.9. Automatic Revocation. The immediate termination of all rights and privileges of teacher
licensure or certification as provided for by W. Va. Code §18A-3-6(d) as a result of a guilty plea or
conviction for: the crimes of child abuse or sexual abuse under W. Va. Code §61-8D-3 or §61-8D-5, ora
comparable statute or statutes in another state; a guilty plea or conviction for any criminal offense that
requires a teacher to register as a sex offender; a guilty plea or conviction for any criminal offense which
has an element of delivery or distribution of a controlled substance; or a guilty plea or conviction under
