126CSR136

6.2.d. Public Database. The State Superintendent shall maintain a public database of individuals
who have had adverse action taken against their teaching certificate issued by the State Superintendent.
Individuals whose certificates have been suspended or revoked by the State Superintendent are not
eligible to be employed by a county board of education unless the certificate is subsequently reinstated
by the State Superintendent (W. Va. Code §18A-3-6(f)).

6.2.0.1. All disciplinary actions taken against a certificate shall be reported to the National
Association of State Directors of Teacher Education and Certification (NASDTEC) Clearinghouse.

6.2.e. Reinstatement Procedure Following Suspension or Revocation of Certificates. Except in
the case of permanent revocation, a teacher or certificate holder whose license or certificate has been
suspended or revoked may apply for reinstatement upon the expiration of the suspension or upon the
expiration of the time specified for reapplication after a period of revocation, and once any conditions for
reinstatement imposed by the State Superintendent have been satisfied.

6.2.e.1. An application for reinstatement shall be considered an application for initial license
under W. Va. Code §18A-3-10, and the applicant must therefore be fingerprinted for a criminal
background check.

6.2.e.2. The WVDE shall conduct an investigation to determine whether the teacher has
satisfied any and all requirements for reinstatement and can demonstrate a record of rehabilitation which
supports that the teacher presently possesses the integrity, moral character and competence to resume
the duties of a teacher.

6.2.e,3. If, during the period of suspension or revocation, the requirements for the teacher’s
certification have changed, the teacher must satisfy those requirements before reinstatement may be
considered.

6.2.e.4. If the WVDE determines that a question exists as to a teacher’s fulfillment of all
requirements, and therefore, a hearing is necessary, it shall submit a written report to the Professional
Practice Panel of the WVCPTS.

6.2.e.5. After receipt of the WVDE’s written report, the Professional Practice Panel shall
conduct a hearing and make a recommendation to the State Superintendent as to whether the teacher’s
certificate should be reinstated and whether any conditions or restrictions should be placed upon the
reinstated certificate. In determining whether the teacher has been rehabilitated, the Professional
Practice Panel shall consider the seriousness of the conduct that formed the basis of the suspension or
revocation.

6.2.f. Hearings and Appeals. An individual whose application for licensure, or licensure
renewal, has been recommended for permanent denial for cause or denial for cause may request an
appeal before the Licensure Appeal Panel of the WVCPTS in accordance with 126CSR4, Policy 1340, Rules
and Procedures for Administrative Hearings and Appeals (Policy 1340). A hearing before the Professional
Practice Panel of the WVCPTS is provided to an individual when the WVDE initiates a certificate revocation
proceeding in accordance with Policy 1340.

14
