126CSR136

reading and numeracy; completion of unduplicated WVDE-approved coursework equivalent to a
minimum of three semester hours or WVLearns coursework in each of the four areas of early childhood
special education, child development, early childhood literacy science of reading, numeracy, which
includes classroom and behavior management and expectations; and,

12.3.b.2. If a candidate is currently employed by a county board of education, multi-county
CTE center, or WVSDT, the candidate must be recommended for an ECCAT Ill Permanent Authorization by
the employing county superintendent. If the candidate is not employed by a county board of education,
then the educator must secure a recommendation from a personal or professional reference that is not
related to, nor residing in the same household as, the candidate.

12.3.c. Validity Period. A candidate who holds an authorization for ECCAT II! shall be multi-
classified and eligible for aide and/or paraprofessional positions. The ECCAT ||| authorization remains valid
unless surrendered, suspended, or revoked.

12.3.d. Grade Extension for Grades 1 through 3. Candidates who hold an ECCAT II] Permanent
Authorization issued with an effective date prior to July 1, 2023, are eligible to apply for an endorsement
for grades 1-3 by completing the required WVDE-approved coursework.

12.4. Permanent Paraprofessional Certificate.

12.4.a. General Criteria. A Paraprofessional Certificate may be issued to a candidate who meets
the general requirements in accordance with section 9and the general conditions for issuance established
in section 12.4.b. The Paraprofessional Certificate entitles the license holder to be employed in a support
position including, but not limited to, facilitating the instruction and direct or indirect supervision of
students under the supervision of a professional educator. The Permanent Paraprofessional Certificate
remains valid unless surrendered, suspended, or revoked.

12.4.b. Conditions for Issuance. A candidate for a Permanent Paraprofessional Certificate is
required to submit documentation that they have completed 36 semester hours of postsecondary
education reflected on an official seal-bearing transcript or its equivalent in certificates of completion
from WVDE’s WVLearns courses in the following areas: a minimum of three semester hours each of
college/university credit or its equivalent in reading, writing, and mathematical computations; or passing
the respective WVBE-required basic skills exam in reading, writing, and mathematics; or meeting an
exemption established in section 10. A valid Apprenticeship for Child Development Specialist (ACDS)
certificate issued by the United States Department of Labor (USDOL) for a candidate who entered the
program during or after Fall 2002 is sufficient to satisfy the reading and math if the coursework is approved
by the designated official at the WVDE; and, meet the following requirements:

12.4.b.1. General Studies. A candidate must have successfully completed a minimum of six
semester hours of college/university credit or its equivalent from the humanities, fine arts, and/or
physical, biological, or social sciences. A valid Apprenticeship for Child Development Specialist (ACDS)
certificate issued by the (USDOL) for a candidate who entered the program during or after Fall 2002 is
sufficient to satisfy the general studies course requirements;

12.4.b.2. Special Education. A candidate must have successfully completed a minimum of

three semester hours of college/university credit or its equivalent in special education. Documentation
of a minimum of two years of successful experience which included special needs children and a minimum

72
