126CSR136

accredited IHE. A Special Education Assistant Teacher Temporary Authorization is valid for one school
year and, may be renewed twice.

12.6.b. General Conditions for Issuance. A candidate for a Special Education Assistant Teacher
Temporary Authorization is required to submit documentation that they meet the following criteria: has
a minimum of a high school diploma, a WVBE-approved high school equivalent, or a degree, if applicable,
through an accredited IHE; and the candidate’s commitment agreement to complete WVDE-approved
coursework.

12.6.c. Renewal of Special Education Assistant Teacher Temporary Authorization. A candidate
for renewal is required to submit documentation that they meet the following criteria: completion of a
minimum of one course of the required WVDE- approved coursework; and be recommended for renewal
of the Special Education Assistant Teacher Temporary Authorization by the employing county
superintendent.

12.7. Aide V. Special Education Assistant Teacher Permanent Authorization.

12.7.a. General Criteria. The Special Education Assistant Teacher Permanent Authorization
remains valid unless surrendered, suspended, or revoked. <A Special Education Assistant Teacher
Permanent Authorization may be issued to a candidate that has a high school diploma, a WVBE-approved
high school equivalent, or a degree, if applicable, through an accredited IHE; and has completed the
required WVDE-approved coursework.

12.8. Aide VI. Behavioral Support Assistant Teacher.

12.8.a. General Criteria. A Temporary Authorization for Behavioral Support Assistant Teacher
may be issued to a candidate who is currently employed as a special education assistant teacher that has
a high school diploma, a WVBE-approved high school equivalent, or a degree, if applicable, through an
accredited IHE. A Behavioral Support Assistant Teacher Temporary Authorization is valid for one school
year and may be renewed once.

12.8.b. General Conditions for Issuance. A candidate for a Behavioral Support Assistant Teacher
Temporary Authorization is required to submit documentation that they meet the following criteria: has
a minimum of a high school diploma, a WVBE-approved high school equivalent, or a degree, if applicable,
through an accredited IHE; and, the candidate’s commitment agreement to complete WVDE-approved
coursework.

12.8.c. Renewal of Behavioral Support Assistant Teacher Temporary Authorization. A candidate
applying for renewal is required to submit documentation that they meet the following requirements:
completion of the required WVDE-approved coursework; and be recommended for renewal of the
Behavioral Support Assistant Teacher Temporary Authorization by the employing county superintendent.

12.9. Aide VI. Behavioral Support Assistant Teacher Permanent Authorization.
12.9.a. General Criteria. The Behavioral Support Assistant Teacher Permanent Authorization
remain valid unless surrendered, suspended, or revoked. A Behavioral Support Assistant Teacher

Permanent Authorization may be issued to a candidate that has a high school diploma, a WVBE-approved
high school equivalent, or a degree, if applicable, through an accredited IHE; and, has completed six

76
