126CSR136

documentation that the candidate has a valid West Virginia Board of Physical Therapy registration and is
recommended for reissuance by the employing county superintendent. Additionally, an individual
employed for the purpose of athletic trainings shall attend the required athletic trainer workshop
provided by the WVSSAC.

20.3. Limited Sports Training Authorization. If a county board of education cannot employ an
individual in athletic training, they may employ an individual with a medical background including, but not
limited to, a chiropractor, a physical therapist, an RN, a licensed practical nurse, a physician, a physician’s
assistant, a paramedic, an occupational therapist, an emergency medical technician, or a nurse
practitioner for a Limited Sports Training Authorization. An individual employed under this section shall
complete the requirements established for a Limited Sports Training Authorization and submit
documentation that they hold a high school diploma or a state-approved high school equivalent.

20.3.a. A county board of education is required to post a position for Athletic Trainer(s) with a
closing date prior to the WVSSAC season start date for fall sports. Ifan authorized or authorization-eligible
athletic trainer does not apply for the position, the county board may employ an individual from the list
of health care professionals in accordance with section 20.3. The county board of education, along with
the candidate, must complete the appropriate WVDE application for licensure with documentation that
the candidate meets the following criteria: holds a high school diploma or state-approved high school
equivalent; holds a valid health care provider license; and, has completed the athletic training workshop
required and provided by the WVSSAC; or assurance that the candidate will attend the athletic trainer
workshop pursuant to the WVSSAC guidelines.

20.3.b. Renewal of a Limited Sports Training Authorization. A Limited Sports Training
Authorization may be reissued annually upon application submitted with documentation that the
candidate holds a valid health care provider license and is recommended for reissuance by the employing
county superintendent.

20.4. Student Support Certificate for Athletic Trainer. Student Support Certificates for Athletic
Trainer issued prior to July 1, 2011, may be renewed in accordance with the renewal requirements for a
Professional Student Support Certificate in accordance with section 10. Initial Professional Student
Support Certificates for Athletic Trainer will not be issued after July 1, 2011.

20.5. A county superintendent aware of any act(s) on the part of any individual licensed athletic
trainer or limited sports trainer for which a certificate may be revoked is required to report the
information, including all facts and evidence, to the State Superintendent for any action the State
Superintendent deems appropriate. Additionally, the county superintendent is required to report any act
of misconduct committed by a licensed athletic trainer to the West Virginia Board of Physical Therapy and
any other appropriate licensing entities.

§126-136-21. Additional Endorsement(s) for Existing Certificate.

21.1. Criteria for Additional Endorsement(s) to an Existing Certificate. A candidate holding a West
Virginia Professional Certificate may be issued an additional endorsement if they submit documentation
that they meet the following criteria: had a minimum of a 2.50 GPA in the area(s) for which they are
applying for an additional endorsement; and the requirements established in Policy 5100, if the
candidate’s application for an additional endorsement is based on program completion at a West Virginia
EPP; or, be recommended by an eligible out-of-state program if the candidate completed an out-of-state

87
