126CSR136

that they meet the following criteria: holds a valid West Virginia Professional Certificate; successfully
completed the Advanced Placement Course Audit required by the College Board; is recommended for the
Advanced Placement Teacher Credential by the employing county superintendent; and, completed one
of the following:

24.4.b.1. Advanced Placement Institute. Successfully completed a 30-clock hour College
Board endorsed Advanced Placement Summer Institute or an equivalent College Board endorsed
Advanced Placement Summer Institute offered through the WVDE or an out-of-state provider endorsed
by the College Board. All professional learning for the initial Advanced Placement Teacher Credential was
completed subsequent to June 1, 2005; or,

24.4.b.2. Acceptance by the College Board to read exams and participate in a minimum of
one Advanced Placement Exam Reading; or be accepted by the College Board to offer institutes and
workshops and deliver at least one course-specific institute or workshop; or successfully serve as a mentor
to a novice Advanced Placement Teacher; or successfully completed at least three semester hours of
coursework directly related to the Advanced Placement course for which they applied for an Advanced
Placement Credential.

24.4.b.3. Renewal of Advanced Placement Teacher. A candidate for renewal of an Advanced
Placement Credential is required to submit documentation that they successfully completed the
requirements in accordance with section 24.4.b where these requirements were completed after the
effective date of the credential being renewed and shall have been completed within five years of the
date of application for renewal.

24.4.c, Personal Finance Education Specialist. The Advanced Credential for Personal Finance
Education Specialist endorsement may be issued to a candidate who has completed the professional
learning offered and/or approved by the WVDE. The Personal Finance Education Specialist delivers
instruction to students in grades K-Adult utilizing the college and career-readiness standards framework.
The Advanced Credential for Personal Finance Education is valid for three years and expires June 30 of the
year it is set to expire.

24.4.c.1. A candidate for an Advanced Credential for Personal Finance Education Specialist is
required to submit documentation that they meet the following criteria: holds a valid West Virginia
Professional Certificate or a valid West Virginia CTE Certificate; and, successfully completed professional
learning on personal finance education provided and/or approved by the WVDE.

24.4.c.2. Renewal of the Personal Finance Education Specialist. An Advanced Credential for
Personal Finance Education Specialist is eligible for renewal if the candidate submits documentation that
they meet the following criteria: holds a valid West Virginia Professional Certificate or a valid West Virginia
CTE Certificate; and, completion of professional learning related to personal finance education
knowledge, skills, and pedagogy offered and/or approved by the WVDE or another nationally recognized
organization; or, successfully completed a minimum of three semester hours of coursework from an
accredited IHE directly related to the field of Personal Finance Education.

24.4.c.3. Permanent Personal Finance Advanced Credential. An Advanced Credential for
Personal Finance Education Specialist may be converted to a Permanent Advanced Credential. A
candidate for a Permanent Advanced Credential for Personal Finance Specialist is required to submit
documentation that they meet the following criteria: holds a valid West Virginia Professional Certificate

96
