126CSR136

ten-calendar days, provided that all licensure requirements have been met on that date. Future
employment and/or assignment dates are permissible. All certificates expire on June 30 of the last year
of their validity irrespective of the date of issuance (W. Va. Code §18A-3-2). A candidate whose eligible
credential is effective after December 1, may be issued a credential exceeding the validity period within
the validity section of the certificate.

9.8. Expiration Date of Certificates. All certificates shall be issued and set to expire in accordance
with this policy and W. Va. Code §18A-3-2a.

9.9. Specializations and Grade Levels. All certificates are required to include specialization(s) and
grade level(s) in accordance with this policy, Policy 5100, and the provisions W. Va. Code §18A-3-2a.
Information relating to specific designations for programmatic levels and specializations are established
in Appendix A of this policy.

9.10. Recognition of Degrees and Coursework for Licensure, Renewal, and Advanced Salary
Classifications.

9.10.a. Dating of Degree Recognition and Advanced Salary Classifications. Upon successful
completion of an advanced degree or additional hours leading to a higher salary classification, the
candidate is required to submit an application to the WVDE. After verifying that the candidate has
completed the required coursework and/or earned the appropriate degree, the new degree/salary
classification will be effective on the date that all requirements for the classification were completed not
to exceed three months prior to WVDE’s receipt of the application for any valid and eligible certificate.

9.10.b. BA. Only a BA earned through an accredited IHE approved to offer a BA may be
recognized for licensure and salary classification purposes.

9.10.c. MA. Only an MA earned through an accredited IHE approved to offer an MA and in a
curriculum related to public education may be recognized for licensure and salary classification purposes.

9.10.d. Doctorate. Only a doctoral degree earned through an accredited IHE approved to offer
a doctorate and in a curriculum related to public education may be recognized for licensure and salary
classification purposes (W. Va. Code §18A-4-1).

9.10.e. Degrees and Coursework from Non-accredited Colleges. Degrees and/or coursework
earned through non-accredited IHEs are not recognized for licensure or salary classification purposes. A
candidate who completed a state-approved program through a non-accredited IHE must complete the
appropriate degree and approved program requirements through an accredited IHE before a license may
be issued.

9.10.f. Recognition of IHE Credit for Renewal and Salary Classification Purposes. Only
unduplicated coursework related to public education as defined in section 4.63, completed through an
accredited IHE, or through the WVDE WVLearns program and reflected on an official [HE transcript, and
subsequent to the issuance of the certificate being renewed and within the five-year period immediately
preceding the date of application may be used for renewal of a certificate.

9.11. Grade Point Average (GPA).

18
