126CSR136

6.2.b.5.D. The teacher or certificate holder pleads guilty to or is convicted of an offense
under the provisions of W. Va. Code §61-2-1, or has been convicted under any law of the United States,
or any other state for an offense which has the same elements as those offenses described in W. Va. Code
§61-2-1; or,

6.2.b.5.E. A court of competent jurisdiction has adjudicated the teacher or certificate
holder as having committed abuse of a child under W. Va. Code §49-4-601.

6.2.b.6. If any conviction resulting in automatic revocation pursuant to section 6.2.b.5 is
overturned by a court of this state or the United States, or if such adjudication of abuse of a child (W. Va.
Code §49-4-601) and resulting in automatic revocation pursuant to section 6.2.b.5 is overturned by the
Supreme Court of Appeals of West Virginia, the teacher’s or certificate holder’s certification shall be
reinstated unless otherwise prohibited by law.

6.2.b.7._ A teacher or certificate holder shall maintain a professional relationship with all
students at all times, both in and out of the classroom. Following a hearing as provided in W. Va. Code
§18A-3-6(a), any teacher or certificate holder found to have committed any act of sexual abuse of a
student or minor or to have engaged in inappropriate sexual conduct with a student or minor, committed
an act of cruelty to children or an act of child endangerment, or solicited, encouraged, engaged in, or
consummated an inappropriate relationship with any student, minor, or individual, exploited a student
by engaging in any of the aforementioned illegal or inappropriate conduct which then escalated into a
relationship with the exploited student within 12 months following that student’s graduation, or engaged
in grooming a student or minor shall have his or her certificate revoked for a period of time not less than
five years.

6.2.b.7.A. For the purposes of section 6.2.b.7, grooming a student or minor means
befriending and establishing an emotional connection with a student or minor, which may include the
family of the student or minor, to lower the student’s or minor’s inhibitions with the objective of
committing sexual abuse, child trafficking, child prostitution, the production of child pornography, or any
other offense for which a certificate shall be revoked.

6.2.6.8. The State Superintendent may issue subpoenas and subpoenas duces tecum to
obtain testimony and documents to aid in the investigation of allegations against any person subject to
licensure by the State Superintendent.

6.2.6.9. The State Superintendent may designate the WVCPTS or members thereof to
conduct hearings on permanent revocations, suspensions, or certificate denials and make
recommendations for action by the State Superintendent. See W. Va. Code §18A-3-6.

6.2.b.10. The State Superintendent shall have the authority to limit certificates, issue letters
of admonishment, or enter into consent agreements requiring specific training as a condition for a teacher
or certificate holder to maintain a certificate.

6.2.c. Recall of Certificates. If a certificate has been issued through error, oversight, or

misinformation, the State Superintendent may recall the certificate and make any such corrections as will
conform to the requirements of law and WVBE policies (W. Va. Code §18A-3-6).

13
