126CSR136

issuance and expiration dates of the advanced certification with receipts for permitted expenses incurred,
if applying for completion fees or extra expenses and verification of the criteria specified in section 23;
and other documentation that may be required.

23.3.g. Procedures for requesting National Certification Salary Supplements. — Eligible
professional personnel who complete advanced ASHA, NBCC, WVBEC, NASP, or NBCSN certification is
eligible for the annual salary supplement if their application includes the following documentation: a copy
of the ASHA, NBCC, WVBEC, NASP, or NBCSN advanced certificate and other official documentation, as
needed, verifying the issuance and expiration dates of the advanced certification; verification of the
criteria in accordance with section 23; and, verification of current employment in the West Virginia public
schools as a SLP, counselor, school psychologist, or school nurse. The state salary supplement expires at
the same time the national certification expires; therefore, a professional who successfully completes a
national certification program is required to apply for a salary supplement renewal.

§126-136-24. Advanced Credentials.

24.1. Advanced Credentials are awarded to educators completing professional learning, coursework,
and/or testing that exceeds the requirements for a professional certificate. Endorsements identified as
Advanced Credentials have unique and specific requirements for the initial issuance and subsequent
renewal. Advanced Credentials may be required for employment.

24.2. Validity Period. The validity period of each Advanced Credential will vary and be specific to
that advanced credential. Any Advanced Credential that is not issued on a permanent basis expires on
June 30 of the year it is set to expire. An Advanced Credential issued on a permanent basis shall remain
valid if the Professional Teaching Certificate or CTE Certificate remains valid and the Advanced Credential
has not been surrendered, suspended, or revoked.

24.3. Conditions of Issuance. A candidate for an Advanced Credential is required to submit
documentation that they satisfy the specific conditions for issuance for the specialization the Advanced
Credential is requested.

24.4. Types of Advanced Credentials. All Advanced Credentials shall be approved by the WVBE
before being available or issued to eligible candidates.

24.4.a. Technology Integration Specialist. The Technology Integration Specialist serves public
schools in an instructional support capacity. A candidate for Technology Integration Specialist is required
to submit documentation that they meet the following criteria: holds a valid West Virginia Professional
Certificate, or an Adult Certificate endorsed for Adult Basic Education in accordance with section 11.11;
completed training required by the employing county; and is recommended by the employing county
superintendent. The Technology Integration Specialist Advanced Credential shall be issued on a
permanent basis and remains for as long as the Professional Teaching Certificate is valid provided the
Advanced Credential has not been surrendered, suspended, or revoked.

24.4.b. Advanced Placement Teacher. An Advanced Placement Teacher delivers instruction in
college-level courses, approved by the College Board, in the high school setting. An Advanced Credential
endorsed for an Advanced Placement Teacher is required for licensure when a job posting requires the
Advanced Placement credential, is valid for three years, and expires on June 30 of the year it is set to
expire. A candidate for an Advance Placement Teacher Credential is required to submit documentation

95
