126CSR136

11.9.b. Conditions for Issuance. A candidate for a Year-Long Residency Permit may apply during
the semester prior to the beginning of the residency and is required to submit documentation that they
meet the following criteria: verification of enrollment in an in-state approved EPP;

11.9.b.1. Criminal History Record Check. A candidate for a Year-Long Residency Permit
whose application is received by the WVDE shall be fingerprinted by the West Virginia State Police, or its
designee, in accordance with section 9, unless the candidate holds a valid credential issued by the WVDE.
Provided, the criminal history record check may not be used for subsequent applications for other
credentials issued by the State Superintendent; and,

11.9.b.2. Required Testing. A candidate is required to pass WVBE-required testing as
stipulated in the EPP’s WVDE-approved residency program unless the candidate qualifies for an
exemption established in section 10.1.e; or,

11.9.b.3. Basic Skills and Content Proficiency. A candidate for a Year-Long Residency permit
whois enrolled in a state-approved EPP resulting in an MA are exempt from basic skills proficiency testing
requirements.

11.9.c. Validity Period. The Year-Long Residency Permit is valid for one school year and expires
on June 30. The Year-Long Residency Permit will serve as a Short-Term Substitute Permit upon verification
from the EPP that the permit holder has completed all approved program course requirements and has
successfully passed all required Praxis exams in accordance with Policy 5100. The permit holder is
authorized to substitute teach as stipulated in the EPP’s WVDE-approved residency program in
accordance with Policy 5100.

11.9.c.1. Exception. A candidate who begins a year-long residency on or after January 1 may
be issued a Residency Permit valid through June 30 of the following school year.

11.10. Substitute Permits for Professional Educators.
11.10.a. Short-Term Substitute Permit for Teaching, Support, and Administrative Personnel.

11.10.a.1. General Criteria. The Initial Short-Term Substitute Permit endorsed for general
substitute may be issued to a candidate who is temporarily replacing an educator assigned to a specific
position that meets the following criteria: holds a minimum of a BA through an accredited IHE; the
general requirements in accordance with section 9; has a minimum GPA of 2.00; and the conditions for
issuance established in section 11.9.a.2. A short-term substitute is a substitute who fills a position for 30
days or less. A Non-United States Citizen candidate shall hold a valid Permanent Resident Card,
Employment Authorization Document (EAD), or work permit issued by the United States Citizenship and
Immigration Services (USCIS) (W. Va. Code §18A-3-1).

11.10.a.2. Conditions for Issuance. The candidate for the initial Short-Term Substitute Permit
is required to submit documentation that they meet the following criteria:

11.10.a.2.A. Verification that they have successfully completed a minimum 18 clock
hours of training provided, or authorized by, the employing county board of education or available
through the WVDE WVLearns platform that included classroom management, state and local policies,
state-approved content standards, an overview of school law that included reporting requirements for

48
