126CSR136

11.12.m. Initial Authorization for JROTC Program and Renewal. A candidate applying for an
initial Authorization for JROTC Program, or a renewal is required to submit documentation that they meet
the following criteria: holds a JROTC Instructor certification awarded by a branch of the United States
Military; and, is recommended for an initial authorization or a renewal of their current authorization by
the employing county superintendent based on the candidate being the most qualified candidate for the
position. The JROTC Authorization is valid for two years from the date it was issued.

11.12.n. Initial Temporary Authorization for School Nutrition Director. A candidate for an initial
Temporary Authorization for School Nutrition Director is required to submit documentation that they
meet the following criteria: holds a bachelor’s degree with a minimum 2.50 GPA, including six semester
hours of coursework related to nutrition, food, and/or food service management, or a WVDE-approved
training provided by the Office of Child Nutrition within 90 days of the start date in that position;
completion of a minimum of eight hours of food safety training obtained within the five years prior to, or
30 days of, the start date in that position; and, is recommended for a temporary authorization by the
employing county superintendent based on the candidate being the most qualified candidate for the
position.

11.12.n.1. Validity Period. An initial Temporary Authorization for the School Nutrition
Director is valid for three years.

11.12.n.2. Renewal of the Temporary Authorization for School Nutrition Director. A
candidate for renewal of a Temporary Authorization for School Nutrition Director is required to submit
documentation that they meet the following criteria: completion of 12 clock hours of job-specific training
each year related to child nutrition programs; holds a valid United States Department of Agriculture
(USDA) food safety certification; and, be recommended for renewal by the employing county
superintendent.

11.12.0. Initial Authorization for Speech Assistant. A candidate for an initial Authorization for
Speech Assistant is required to submit documentation that they meet the following criteria: holds a
minimum of a BA in speech pathology, communication disorders, or a related field from an accredited
IHE determined acceptable by the WVDE; employed as a speech assistant by a county board of education
in West Virginia; and, be recommended by the employing county superintendent based on the candidate
being the most qualified candidate for the position and that a fully West Virginia certified SLP did not
apply for the position.

11.12.0.1. Renewal of the Authorization for Speech Assistant. A candidate for renewal of an
Authorization for Speech Assistant is required to provide documentation that they meet the following
criteria: completion of professional learning activities designated by the WVDE; employment asa speech
assistant by a county board of education; and, be recommended for renewal by the employing county
superintendent based on the candidate being the most qualified candidate for the position and that a
fully West Virginia certified SLP did not apply for the position.

11.12.p. Initial Authorization for Curriculum/Cultural Enrichment. A candidate for an initial
Authorization for Curriculum/Cultural Enrichment is required to provide documentation that they meet
the following criteria: holds a minimum of a BA from an accredited IHE; employed by a county board of
education to provide curriculum/culture enrichment in accordance with locally adopted policy that
includes a provision that a person performing duties under an Curriculum/Cultural Enrichment

62
