126CSR136

11.12.a. General Criteria. An Authorization may be issued to a candidate that meets the
following criteria: holds a BA or an MAas specified in Appendix A through an accredited IHE, if applicable;
the general requirements in accordance with section 9; the minimum GPA in accordance with section 9,
if applicable; and passes a criminal history record check; and, meets the conditions for issuance required
for the specialization or concentration for which the candidate is applying for a license. The Authorization
shall be endorsed to indicate the specialization(s) and/or concentration(s) and the grade level(s) in which
the holder is authorized to be assigned within the public schools. Authorization may be issued to a
candidate who is employed and assigned to a position for which a specialization related to public school
instruction or a public school program does not exist on the Professional or CTE Certificate.

11.12.a.1. Conditions for Issuance. A candidate applying for an Authorization must submit
documentation that they satisfy the specific conditions for issuance for the specialization for which the
candidate has applied for a license.

11.12.a.2. Validity Period. An Authorization is valid for one school year and expires on June
30, unless the validity period is otherwise extended by this policy. A candidate employed in a
specialization, other than coaching, on or after January 1 may be issued an Authorization valid until June
30 of the following school year. However, an Authorization endorsed for coaching expires on June 30 of
the current school year.

11.12.b. Initial Out-of-Field Authorization for Teaching. A candidate applying for an initial Out-
of-Field Authorization for Teaching is required to submit documentation that they meet the following
criteria: holds a valid West Virginia Professional Teaching Certificate; has a Professional Commitment
form verifying that they are enrolled in an |IHE’s state-approved program; and receive the recommended
by the employing county superintendent based on the candidate being the most qualified or only
candidate for the position.

11.12.b.1. Limitations. Out-of-Field Authorizations are restricted to teaching specializations
and shall only be issued if the candidate does not qualify for a First-Class/Full-Time Permit.

11.12.b.2. Extension. An Out-of-Field Authorization may be extended in accordance with
section 14.4.

11.12.b.3. Renewal of the Out-of-Field Authorization for Teaching. A candidate applying for
a renewal of an Out-of-Field-Authorization for Teaching permit is required to submit documentation that
they meet the following criteria: holds a valid West Virginia Professional Teaching Certificate; completion
of six semester hours of college/university coursework approved by the accredited IHE, where the
candidate is completing the approved licensure program; have a 3.00 GPA within the approved program
degree requirements of the specializations for which the Out-of-Field Authorization will be issued;
verification from the designate IHE official that the coursework was completed as part of the IHE’s state-
approved program; and be recommended for renewal by the employing county superintendent.

11.12.c. Initial Authorization for Alternative Learning Setting Education. A candidate applying
for an initial Authorization for Alternative Learning Setting Education is required to submit documentation
that they meet the following criteria: holds a valid West Virginia Professional Teaching Certificate; is
recommended for the permit by the employing county superintendent based on the candidate being the
most qualified candidate for the position and meeting the selection criteria required to work with

59
