126CSR136

of 10 clock hours of in-service training directly related to special education may be substituted for the
college/university credit experience was acquired in a public education classroom setting while the
candidate was under direct supervision of a licensed public educator; or has successfully completed the
WvVLearns Early Childhood Special Needs Inclusion course offered through the WVDE; or holds a valid CDA
certificate issued by the Council for Professional Recognition or completion of the CTE ECCAT program ;
or holds a valid ACDS certificate issued after 2002 by the USDOL;

12.4.b.3. Classroom Management. A candidate must have successfully completed a
minimum of three semester hours of college/university credit or its equivalent in classroom management
acquired in a public classroom setting or a non-public school accredited through a WVBE-approved
accreditation agency in accordance with W. Va. 126CSR13C, Policy 2330, Non-public School Accreditation
(Policy 2330). Documentation of a minimum of two years of experience in the successful use of classroom
management skills may be substituted for college/university credit if the experience was acquired in the
public education classroom setting or a non-public school accredited through a WVBE-approved
accreditation agency in accordance with Policy 2330 while the candidate was under direct supervision of
a licensed public educator; or hold a valid Apprenticeship for Child Development Specialist certificate
issued by the USDOL for a candidate who entered the program during or after Fall 2002; or hold a valid
CDA certificate issued by the Council for Professional Recognition;

12.4.b.4. Human Growth and Development. A candidate must have successfully completed
a minimum of three semester hours of college/university credit or its equivalent in human growth and
development or psychology, or hold a valid Apprenticeship for Child Development Specialist Certificate
issued by the USDOL for a candidate who entered the program during or after Fall 2002; or successful
completion of the WVLearns Early Childhood Child Development course offered through the WVDE; or
documented completion of the CTE ECCAT program of study; or hold a valid CDA Certificate issued by the
Council for Professional Recognition;

12.4.b.5. Electives. A candidate must have successfully completed twelve semester hours of
electives related to public instruction or its equivalent. One elective requirement may be met if the
candidate holds a valid Apprenticeship for Child Development Specialist certificate issued by the USDOL
for those who entered the program during/after Fall 2002; or may include completion of WVLearns
coursework in early childhood literacy science of reading, and early childhood numeracy equivalent to six
semester hours; or holds a valid CDA certificate issued by the Council for Professional Recognition; and,

12.4.b.6. Academic Assessment. A candidate must have met a rigorous standard of quality
and demonstrate, through a formal state-approved academic assessment that includes, but is not limited
to, a measurement of the candidate’s subject matter knowledge and ability to assist in instructing,
reading, writing, and mathematics; as well as reading readiness, writing readiness, and mathematics
readiness, as appropriate. Paraprofessionals must meet WVBE requirements for the Paraprofessional
Certificate. Paraprofessionals who have passed the current state competency exam for aides,
administered by a county board of education, and developed (W. Va. Code §18A-4-8e), is sufficient to
meet this requirement; or,

12.4.b.7. Hold a valid out-of-state Professional Teaching Certificate or a valid or expired
Professional Teaching Certificate that has been expired for five years or less or its equivalent; fulfills all
coursework and, assessment criteria; and be recommended for a Permanent Paraprofessional Certificate
by the employing county superintendent.

73
