126CSR136

11.10.c.2. Conditions for Issuance. A candidate for a Substitute CTE Permit is required to
submit documentation that they meet the following criteria and the appropriate content specific
conditions for issuance identified in the West Virginia CTE Endorsement and Testing Manual.

11.10.c.2.A. Wage-Earning Experience. Verification of the required years of work
experience by the current or former employer(s) as specified in the West Virginia CTE Endorsement and
Testing Manual;

11.10.c.2.B. Successful completion of 18 clock hours of training provided, or authorized,
by the employing county that included classroom management, state and local policies, instructional goals
and objectives, an overview of school law including reporting requirements for suspected child abuse, and
beginning July 1, 2021, trauma-informed best practices. The 18 clock hours of training may include not
more than six clock hours of classroom observation completed within one year prior to the date the
application is received by the LEA. An RN holding a valid nursing license and hired as a clinical instructor
to monitor students in a practical nursing and/or a certified nursing assistant program is exempt from the
18 hours of training requirement established in this section; and,

11.10.c.2.C. Industry Recognized Credentials. The candidate for the Substitute CTE
Permit must submit evidence of holding the industry recognized credential(s), if applicable, as identified
in the CTE Endorsement and Testing Manual; and, receive the recommendation of the employing
Superintendent, Multi-County CTE Administrator, or WVSDT Superintendent or designee.

11.10.c.3. Validity Period. A Substitute CTE Permit is valid for not more than three school
years and expires on June 30 of the last year of its validity.

11.10.c.4. Renewal of Substitute CTE Permit. A Candidate applying to renew a Substitute CTE
Permit is required to submit documentation that they meet the following criteria:

11.10.c.4.A. Coursework. Verification that the candidate has successfully completed
eligible WVLearns coursework, or 12 clock hours of in-service training provided, or authorized by, the
employing county that includes classroom management, teaching strategies, and beginning July 1, 2021,
trauma-informed best practices or completion of WVLearns substitute renewal course. The 12 clock hours
of renewal training may include a maximum of three clock hours of classroom observation completed
subsequent to the issuance of a Substitute CTE Permit being renewed and within the five-year period
immediately preceding the application date; or

11.10.c.4.B. The criteria established in section 11.10.c; and,

11.10.c.4.C. Industry Recognized Credential. A valid industry credential is required to
renew a Substitute CTE Permit as specified in the West Virginia CTE Endorsement and Testing Manual, if
applicable; and be recommended for renewal of the Substitute CTE Permit by the Superintendent, Multi-
County CTE Administrator, or the WVSDT Superintendent or designee.

11.10.c.5. A candidate holding a valid West Virginia Professional Teaching Certificate may
apply for a Substitute CTE Permit for any specialization area(s) for which the candidate qualifies in
accordance with the appropriate content specific conditions for issuance established in section 11.7
without completing the initial 18 clock hours of training.

52
