126CSR136

11.11.h.1.E. Not accumulated more than nine points on the candidate’s DMV record at
any time during the past five years;

11.11.h.1.F. Not been convicted by a court with competent jurisdiction and/or been
subject to a DMV suspension or revocation of their driver’s license on a charge of operating a motor
vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, controlled substance, any other drugs or the combination
thereof, and has not operated a motor vehicle while under the influence as established by a
preponderance of evidence, such as positive breath or blood test, or field sobriety test, notwithstanding
the lack of a conviction or DMV suspension or revocation; and,

11.11.h.1.G. Completion of 18 clock hours of training provided or authorized by the
employing county, or available through the WVDE WVLearns platform. Provided, a candidate currently
holding a valid West Virginia Professional Teaching Certificate is exempt from this requirement.

11.11.h.2. A candidate applying for a Driver Education Permit or certificate is subject to a
criminal history check; and must be recommended for the permit by the employing county
superintendent.

11.11.h.3. Driver Education Temporary Permit Renewal.

11.11.h.3.A. A candidate applying for a renewal must submit documentation that they
meet the following criteria:

11.11.h.3.A.1. Verification that they have completed 18 clock hours of training
provided, or authorized, by the employing county or available through the WVDE WVLearns platform.
Provided, a candidate currently holding a valid West Virginia Professional Teaching Certificate is exempt
from this requirement;

11.11.h.3.A.2. Verification that they have completed six hours of coursework toward
a Driver Education Certification or three hours of approved professional learning provided by the WVDE;

11.11.h.3.A.3. Verification that they have completed the mandatory Driver’s
Education Clinical Experience with a certified Driver Education Teacher currently employed in a county

school system;

11.11.h.3.A.4. A copy of the candidate’s current Driver’s License and driving record if
a driving record has not been submitted to the WVDE within the previous 30 days; and,

11.11.h.3.A.5. Be recommended for renewal by the employing county
superintendent.

11.11.h.3.A.6. A candidate issued a renewal of a Driver Education Temporary Permit
is required to report any moving violations, including a DUI, to the WVDE within 7 days of the violation

being issued.

11.12. Authorizations Issued to Educators.

58
