126CSR136

suspected child abuse and trauma-informed best practices. Provided, the 18 clock hours of training may
include a maximum of six clock hours of classroom observation completed within one year prior to the
date the application is received by the local education agency (LEA).

11.10.a.2.A.1. Completion of clinical practice at a West Virginia IHE approved by the
WVBE to offer teacher education programs may be used to meet training requirements. The clinical
practice must have been completed within one year prior to the date the application is received by the
LEA; and be recommended for a Short-Term Substitute Permit for Professional Educators by the
employing county superintendent. If the candidate does not hold a professional certificate but has been
a teacher of record for a minimum of one year within the past three years, the experience as the teacher
of record may be used to meet training requirements; or

11.10.a.2.A.2. Hold an expired West Virginia Professional Certificate or a valid or
expired Out-of-State Professional Teaching, Student Support, or Administrative Certificate. A candidate
applying for a Short-Term Substitute Permit may use the expired West Virginia Professional Certificate or
Out-of-State Professional Certificate, as established in this section, once to obtain a Substitute Permit if
the Certificate has not been expired for more than five years prior to the application date. If the Certificate
has been expired longer than five years prior to the application for the Substitute Permit date, the
candidate is required to meet the requirements established in section 11.10 to obtain a Substitute Permit;
and be recommended for a Substitute Permit by the superintendent of the employing county.

11.10.a.3. Validity Period. The Short-Term Substitute Permit shall be valid for not more than
three school years and expires on June 30 of the last year of its validity.

11.10.a.4. Renewal of the Short-Term Substitute Permit. A candidate for renewal of the
Short -Term Substitute Permit is required to submit documentation that they meet the following criteria:

11.10.a.4.A. Verified Training. Verification that they have successfully completed 12 clock
hours of in-service training provided, or authorized, by the employing county or available through the
WVDE WVLearns platform that included classroom management and teaching strategies, and beginning
July 1, 2021, trauma-informed best practices. The 12 clock hours training requirement for renewal of a
Short-Term Substitute Permit may include a maximum of three clock hours of classroom observation
completed after the issuance of the permit being renewed but within the five-year-period immediately
preceding the application date. If the individual does not hold a professional certificate but has been a
teacher of record for a minimum of one year employed under an eligible permit or authorization, other
than a substitute permit, within the past three years, the experience as the teacher of record can be used
to meet the training requirement; or,

11.10.a.4.B. Successful completion of eligible WVLearns coursework or six semester
hours of coursework from an accredited IHE. The coursework must be related to public education and
completed after the issuance of the permit being renewed and within the five-year period immediately
preceding the application date; and be recommended for a Substitute Permit by the superintendent of
the employing county.

11.10.b. Long-Term Substitute Permit for Teaching, Support, and Administrative Personnel.
11.10.b.1. General Criteria. The initial Long-Term Substitute Permit endorsed for any

specialization recognized on the Professional Teaching, Support or Administrative Certificate may be

49
