126CSR136

11.10.d. Restricted Short-Term Substitute Permit.

11.10.d.1. General Criteria. The Restricted Short-Term Substitute Permit endorsed for a
general substitute may be issued to a candidate who is temporarily replacing the educator assigned to a
specific position in a county which has an approved substitute shortage waiver from the State
Superintendent and submits documentation that they meet the following criteria: holds a minimum of
60 semester credit hours or 90 quarter of completed course work with a 2.00 cumulative GPA or higher,
or an AA through an accredited |HE reflected on official academic transcripts with a minimum GPA of 2.00;
Courses may include but are not limited to evidence of competencies in core areas such as English,
Reading, Writing, and Mathematics, communications, social sciences, humanities and fine arts, analytical
and inferential reasoning, and computational skills. These hours must be reflected on an official transcript
of an accredited institution. the general requirements in accordance with section 9; is 21 or older; and,
meets the conditions for issuance established in section 11.10.d.2. The Restricted Short-Term Substitute
Permit shall not be used in lieu of a Coaching Authorization unless all West Virginia Secondary School
Activities Commission (WVSSAC) coursework and WVDE requirements for the Restricted Substitute Permit
are met in accordance with section 11.10.d. A Non-United States Citizen candidate is required to also
meet the documentation requirements in accordance with section 17.1.

11.10.d.2. Conditions for Issuance. A candidate applying for a Restricted Short-Term
Substitute Permit is required to submit documentation that they meet the following criteria:

11.10.d.2.A. Verification that the candidate has successfully completed 18 clock hours of
training provided, or authorized by, the employing county board of education or available through the
WVDE e-Learning platform that included classroom management, state and local policies, state-approved
content standards, an overview of school law including reporting requirements for suspected child abuse
and trauma-informed best practices. The 18 clock hours of training may include a maximum of six clock
hours of classroom observation completed within one year prior to the date the application is received by
the LEA. Completion of clinical practice at a West Virginia IHE approved by the WVBE to offer teacher
education programs may be used in lieu of the training. The clinical practice must have been completed
within one year prior to the date the application is received by the LEA; and, the candidate must be
recommended for a Restricted Short-Term Substitute Permit by the superintendent of the employing
county.

11.10.d.3. Validity Period. A Restricted Short-Term Substitute Permit expires on June 30 and
may be renewed.

11.10.d.4. Renewal of the Restricted Short-Term Substitute Permit. A Candidate applying to
renew a Restricted Short-Term Substitute Permit is required to submit documentation that they meet the
following criteria:

11.10.d.4.A. Verified Training. Verification that the candidate has successfully completed
12 clock hours of in-service training provided, or authorized by, the employing county or available through
the WVDE WVLearns platform that included classroom management, teaching strategies, and beginning
July 1, 2021, trauma-informed best practices. The 12 clock hours of renewal training may include a
maximum of three clock hours of classroom observation completed subsequent to the issuance of the
permit being renewed and within the five-year period immediately preceding the application date; or,

53
