126CSR136

directory, or meet the criteria in section 10.3.a.1.D.1(a).(2); and, complete a West Virginia State Police
and FBI background check (section 9 of this policy) and (W. Va. Code §18A-3-10).

10.3.a.1.D.1.(a).(1). Required Exam. Candidates who hold a valid national
certification by ASHA who took Praxis exam(s) required by ASHA at the time the national certification was
obtained are exempt from meeting the required WVBE exam specified in the directory at the time of
application.

10.3.a.1.D.1.(a).(2).. Candidates without pre-k-12 _ practicum/clinical
experience. A Professional Provisional Student Support Certificate for SLP may be issued to a candidate
who has completed the requirements in accordance with section 10.3.a except verification of completion
of a practicum/clinical experience in the pre-k-12 setting. In lieu of practicum/clinical experience,
candidates are required to provide verification that they have completed a minimum of one year of
experience working with pre-k-12 students in the State that issued the SLP license.

10.3.a.1.D.1.(b). Validity Period. The Provisional Student Support Certificate is
valid for one school year and expires on June 30 of that school year. An educator who graduates in
December, or whose Provisional Certificate is effective on or after January 1, may be issued a Provisional
Certificate valid until June 30 of the following school year. The Provisional Certificate may not be renewed.

10.3.a.1.D.1.(c). Conversion of a Provisional Student Support Certificate to a
Professional Student Support Certificate. Candidates are required to provide documentation that they
have acquired a minimum of one year of full-time or contracted services experience working in a West
Virginia public school as an SLP with successful evaluations.

10.3.a.1.E. Attendance Director. A professional Student Support Certificate may be issued
for Attendance Director to a candidate who has completed an approved Social Services and Attendance
program from an accredited IHE.

10.3.a.2. Validity Period. The Professional Student Support Certificate is valid for three school
years and expires on June 30 of the last year of its validity.

10.3.a.3. Renewal of Professional Student Support Certificate.
10.3.a.3.A. Renewal of a Professional Student Support Certificate issued for one year.

10.3.a.3.A.1. Three semester hours of coursework from an accredited IHE with a
minimum 3.00 GPA in each course related to public education or WVDE WVLearns courses completed
subsequent to the issuance of the certificate being renewed and within the five-year period immediately
preceding the date of application; and,

10.3.a.3.A.2 Recommendation. If the candidate is currently employed by a county
board of education, multi-county CTE center, or WVSDT, the candidate must be recommended for
renewal by the employing county superintendent. If the educator is not employed by a county board of
education, then the educator must secure a recommendation from a personal or professional reference
that is not related to, nor residing in the same household as, the candidate.

10.3.a.3.B. Renewal of a Professional Student Support Certificate issued for three years.

32
