126CSR136

semester hours of college credit at an institution of higher; or is employed as an aide in aspecial education
program and has a minimum of a year’s experience in special education; and the required WVDE-
approved coursework.

§126-136-13. Grade Level Modification.

13.1. Grade Level Modification. Grade level modifications shall only be approved in accordance with
the Grade Level Modification Eligible Areas specified in Appendix A or Appendix B.

§126-136-14. Waivers and Extensions.

14.1. Substitute waivers may be approved for a county superintendent who is unable to fill a
long-term substitute position with a person licensed in the area of assignment through a waiver request
from the State Superintendent. A written waiver request must include the efforts to employ a fully
qualified candidate and copies of the job postings showing two different posting periods. In instances
where the employee of record will, or may, return to the position, submission of the job postings is not
required. The State Superintendent may approve the waiver if the circumstances warrant approval.
However, the county superintendent is required to continue seeking the employment of an educator with
the appropriate endorsement(s) to fill the position at a time determined to be in the best interest of the
students.

14.2. Severe Substitute Shortage. Under extenuating circumstances, a county superintendent may
request a waiver of the requirements in section 11.10.a.2.A, section 11.10.a.4.a, or section 11.10.b.2.A
that require 18 clock hours of training to be completed prior to the issuance of a substitute permit. The
waiver request must document the shortage and include verification of six clock hours of training. The
initial six clock hours of training must include a classroom management component; and an overview of
school law that includes, but is not limited to, reporting requirements for suspected child abuse; and
beginning July 1, 2021, completion of trauma-informed best practices. Classroom observation is
prohibited from being included to meet the clock hour requirement. The remaining 12 clock hours of
training must be completed during the first semester of employment and in accordance with section 11.9.

14.3. Dual Credit Contracted Services Exemption. An instructional employee of an accredited IHE
who is not regularly employed for instructional purposes in a public school in this State (W. Va. Code §18-
1-1) and is providing a dual credit course is exempt from the requirement of holding the same licensure
required for an educator employed by a county board of education.

14.4. Extension of Professional Certificates for Extenuating Circumstances. A county superintendent
may request, in writing to the State Superintendent, an extension of a Professional Certificate for an
employee, including the county superintendent, who meets one of the circumstances identified in section
14.5.

14.5. Issuance and Extension of the Full-Time Permit/Out-of-Field Authorization of Extenuating
Circumstances. A county superintendent may request, in writing to the State Superintendent, an
extension of the First-Class/Full-Time Permit/Out-of-Field Authorization for an employee, including the
county superintendent, who meets one of the circumstances established in section 14.5.a. The State
Superintendent may approve any request that does not extend the employee’s permit or authorization
beyond one school year more than once.

77
