126CSR136

11.3.d.1.A. Exception for a School Nurse. A School Nurse who is employed on a First-
Class/Full-Time Permit is only required to have a minimum of three semester hours of coursework within
the first year of the permit’s issuance.

11.3.d.1.B. Extenuating Circumstances. The State Superintendent may waive the five-
year limit if extenuating circumstances exist, in accordance with section 14.5, warranting an extension. A
county superintendent may request, in writing to the State Superintendent, an extension of the First-
Class/Full-Time Permit for Professional Teaching and Student Support Personnel for an employee,
including for the position of county superintendent, who meets one of the three extenuating
circumstances specified in section 14.5. The superintendent’s written correspondence is required to be
submitted with the appropriate application and processing fee. If the State Superintendent decides that
an extension is warranted, the permit may be extended once, provided the extension does not exceed
one school year.

11.3.d.1.C. The county superintendent is required to submit documentation from the
designated official at the IHE through which the candidate is completing the state-approved program that
required coursework was not available during the school year; or the county superintendent is required
to submit documentation with an explanation that the candidate has suffered a major hardship, other
than illness, preventing the candidate from meeting the coursework requirement.

11.3.e. Five-Year Limit. All requirements for the Professional Teaching Certificate or Professional
Student Support Certificate are required to be completed within five years of the original issuance of the
First-Class/Full-Time Permit for Professional Teaching and Student Support Personnel (W. Va. Code
§18A-4-7a (4)) unless required otherwise by federal law or rule. The position held by an educator issued
a First-Class/Full-Time Permit for Professional Teaching and Student Support Personnel is not subject to
posting, provided the educator meets the annual renewal requirements in accordance with section 11.2.d
and completes the state-approved program within five years. The State Superintendent may waive the
five-year limitation, if extenuating circumstances exist in accordance with section 14.5.a, warranting an
extension.

11.4. Restricted First-Class/Full-Time Permit for Professional Teaching and Student Support.

11.4.a. General Criteria. The Restricted First-Class/Full-Time Permit for Professional Teaching
and Student Support Personnel may be issued for any specialization(s) recognized on the Professional
Teaching and Support Certificate. A Restricted First-Class/Full-Time Permit for Professional Teaching and
Student Support Personnel may be issued to a candidate employed for a specific assignment who meets
the required criteria in accordance with section 11, except the minimum GPA requirements and may not
be issued again for a new or additional assignment.

11.4.b. Conditions for Issuance. A candidate for the Restricted First-Class/Full-Time Permit for
Professional Teaching and Student Support Personnel is required to meet the requirements for issuance
in accordance with section 11.

11.4.c. Validity Period. The Restricted First-Class/Full-Time Permit for Professional Teaching and
Student Support Personnel is valid for one school year, expires on June 30, and may only be renewed
once. The two years authorized under the Restricted First-Class/Full-Time Permit shall be included in the
total five-year maximum limitation for a First-Class/Full-Time Permit.

43
